---
title: Exam 3 Attempt 1
subtitle: For chapter 5 to 9
author: Mark Lucernas
date: Dec 06, 2020
---


# Exam 3 Attempt 1

> Score 32.92/40 82.29%

## Q1

Fiscal Multiplier and Thrifty Consumers. Suppose that the government gave each
U.S. legal resident \$10 but everyone decided to save the money and not spend
it.

In this case, the fiscal multiplier would be

**C. zero.**

## Q2

Which principle suggests that the demand for money should increase as prices
increase?

**C. The real-nominal principle.**

## Q3

If the Federal Reserve lowers interest rates, the dollar

**B. depreciates, and demand for U.S. exports increases.**

## Q4

Financial intermediaries reduce the risk to savers through

**D. diversification.**

Financial intermediaries also **reduce** the costs of negotiation by pooling the
funds of savers to make loans to individual borrowers and **reduce** liquidity
because households do not normally withdraw their money at the same time.

## Q5*

If the multiplier for government spending is 1.40 and government spending is
increased by \$120 billion, calculate the amount by which the demand curve will
ultimately shift.

Shift of the demand curve = \$**48** billion.

## Q6

Based on the Laffer's theory why do lower tax rates increase government revenue?

**C. When workers get to keep more of their salary, they will work harder thus
increasing the tax base.**

## Q7

Which of the following is one way that the Fed cannot change the supply of
money?

**A. the process of printing money**

## Q8

The Federal Reserve can influence long-term interest rates by

**C. managing the expectations of short-term interest rates.**

## Q9

Bitcoins as Store of Value. Bitcoins are a new form of electronic, privately
issued money that can potentially preserve the anonymity of transactions. In
recent years, the prices of a single Bitcoin has varied between \$400 and
\$19,000. From the point of view of money as a store of value, Bitcoins are

**A. a poor store of value because their prices fluctuate too much.**

## Q10

Why might entrepreneurs and firms use banks for loans instead of going directly
to savers?

**D. All of the above.**

## Q11

Reducing Payroll Taxes as a Stimulus Policy. One part of President Obama's
stimulus policy was to reduce payroll taxes paid by individuals.   The theory is
that this would put more money in the hands of workers and lead to higher
spending.  For this policy to work, it assumes that workers will **spend** any
additional income, thereby **increasing** aggregate demand.

## Q12

In a financial crisis like those that occurred in 2001 and 2008, the Fed can

**B. use contractionary policy to offset expansionary fiscal policy and prevent
inflation.**

## Q13

The demand for money depends **negatively** on the interest rate and
**positively** on the level of prices and real GDP.

## Q14

Real Interest Rates and Opportunity Cost. "When real interest rates are high, so
is the opportunity cost of funds." This statement is true because:

**D. All of the above.**

## Q15

A lottery game offers a prize of \$200,000 at the end of thirty years. If the
interest rate is 7%, the present value of this amount is \$**26273**.

> $\frac{200,000}{(1 + 0.07)^{30}} \approx 26,273$

## Q16

When the money supply is **decreased**, investment spending decreases, shifting
the AD curve to the **left**, and **decreasing** output and prices in the short
run.

To decrease the level of output in the short run, the Fed should

**A. lower the discount rate.**

## Q17

In terms of determining the money supply, the primary difference between debit
cards and credit cards is that

**C. using a debit card is like writing a check, while using a credit card is
like taking out loan.**

## Q18

Taxes and transfer payments that stabilize GDP without requiring explicit
actions by policymakers are called

**A. automatic stabilizers.**

## Q19

The value of the money multiplier **fell** sharply around 2008. Thereafter, its
value remained **below 1** until the end of 2017. Post 2018, its value came
close to **1**.  This change in the series was because the Federal Reserve began
paying interest on **reserves**.

## Q20

Recessions and Interest Rates. Consider an economy with a negatively sloped
money demand curve and a vertical money supply curve. Suppose the economy starts
to head into a recession.

If the economy starts to head into a recession, the demand for money will
**increase**, shifting the money demand curve to the **right**.

As a result, interest rates will **decrease**.

When interest rates decrease, we know that the price of bonds will **increase**.

## Q21

Which of the following is not a key function of the Federal Reserve?

**C. printing currency**

## Q22

Savings and Loans and Risk. Traditionally, savings and loan institutions made
loans only for home mortgages and held on to those mortgages. At one point, this
was viewed as a safe way of doing business. However, this became a risky way of
doing business for U.S. savings and loans in the 1970s.

Why would making loans only for housing and holding on to the mortgages be very
risky?

**B. Because the lender would be very subject to risk and price movements of the
real estate market.**

Why does this provide a rationale for institutions such as Fannie Mae and Freddy
Mac?

**B. Because they take mortgages and separate them into assets that can be part
of a diversified portfolio.**

## Q23

In 1998, the federal budget showed a deficit. **False**

## Q24

The Federal Reserve is reluctant to change the required reserve requirements
because

**A. a bank may end up having a run on deposits.**

## Q25

It is very difficult to implement stabilization policies because of

**C. lags and the inability to accurately forecast aspects of the economy.**

## Q26

The economist who coined the phrase "animal spirits" to refer to investment
spending by firms was  

**C. John Maynard Keynes.**

## Q27

Greek Cash Euro Holdings. "Greeks have increased their holdings of euros in cash
because they have great faith in the monetary system of Europe."

This quote is **not accurate**.  The reason that the Greeks held cash in euros
is because they

**A. thought that Greece might exit the system and the older Greek currency
would have less value.**

## Q28

...

## Q29

During a recession, policymakers should

**D. either increase government spending or cut taxes.**

## Q30

Banks trade reserves with one another in the:

**B. federal funds market.**

## Q31

Oil Price Floor and Investment Spending. Suppose the government said that they
would not let the U.S. price for a barrel of oil fall below \$50.

They could do this by raising taxes on oil if the price fell below \$50.

By keeping the price of oil high, firms would have an incentive to invest in
energy-saving technologies. **True**

## Q32

For the Fed, which lag tends to be shorter?

**B. inside lags**

## Q33

Money market mutual funds are hard to classify in a definition of money because
they are only held to facilitate transactions.

**A. True**

## Q34

Just Raise Taxes? As the population ages and entitlement spending on Social
Security and Medicare increase, some have argued that we should just raise taxes
to pay for them.

The main argument against this solution is that the level of entitlements as a
fraction of GDP is predicted to

**A. rise so high that raising taxes would dramatically increase the tax burden
on the economy and impede economic growth.**

## Q35

Removing \$100 Bills from Circulation? Economist Kenneth Rogoff at Harvard has
recommended removing \$100 bills from circulation.

He made this recommendation because he believed these bills **facilitate illegal
transactions and tax evasion**.

## Q36

When a firm's stock price is high, it can issue shares at a premium and use the
proceeds from their sale to finance new investments. The higher a firm's share
price, the **fewer** shares the firm needs to sell to raise capital. This means,
essentially, that the cost of the project the firm wants to undertake **falls**
as the company's stock price climbs. In other words, **high** stock prices lead
to high investment.

## Q37

A Chinese Experiment. In 2000, the Chinese government mandated three one-week
holidays throughout the year to stimulate consumer spending. The idea was that
these extended vacations would induce the Chinese to spend more of their
earnings while on vacation. Although consumption spending rose during the
vacation period, the data show that consumption fell before and after the
vacation by approximately the same amount as spending rose during the vacation.
As a result, there was **no** change in aggregate demand and the overall policy
of stimulating the economy through mandated vacations was **not** effective.

## Q38

Too Big to Fail? The president of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve, Neel
Kashkari, argues that banks today are too big to let fail and the government
would have to bail them out in a true emergency. He believes the banks should be
downsized to prevent this possibility.  You may wish to see President Kashkari
discuss this idea at
www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/special-studies/endingtbtf. Accessed March
2018. By "too big to fail," he means that if a bank is too big,

**its failure would cause extensive financial disruption, forcing the government
to bail out the bank**.

The costs of breaking up the large banks would depend on whether

**D. All of the above are factors to consider when breaking up the large
banks.**

## Q39

If the interest rate is 11 percent, the present value of \$200 paid one year
from now equals \$**222**.

> 20 * (1 + 0.11) == 222

## Q40

> 3.1 - 3.3 = 0.2

