---
title: Module 1 Notes
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-02-09
---

# Module 1: Using Methods and Parameters

## Chapter 2

### 2.3 Java Basics

**Comment operator**

    /**
     * Comment Goes Here
     */

    or

    /* Comment Goes Here */

    or

    // Comment Goes Here

#### 2.3.1 Math Operators

**Addition**

    > 34 + 56
    90

**Subtraction**

    > 26 - 3
    23

**Multiplication**

    > 3 * 4
    12

**Division**

    > 4 / 2
    2

**Modulo or Modulus**

This operator calculates the _remainder_ of the first number divided by the
second number

    > 9 % 4
    1

#### 2.3.2 Printing the Result of a Statement

* Always end a statement with a semicolon `;`

**Printing Statement**

    System.out.println();

#### 2.3.3 Data Types in Math Expressions

##### Integer and Floating Point Numbers

Using _floating_ point numbers (numbers with decimals)

  - Represented by `int`, `byte`, `short`, or `long`
    * `byte` takes up **8 bits** of memory (1 byte)
    * `short` takes up **16 bits** of memory (2 bytes)
    * `int` takes up **32 bits** of memory (4 bytes)
    * `long` takes up **64 bits** of memory (8 bytes)

        > System.out.println(1.0/2.0);
        0.5

Using _integers_ (numbers without decimals)

  - Represented by `double` or `float`
    * `float` takes up **32 bits** of memory (4 bytes)
    * `double` takes up **64 bits** of memory (8 bytes)

        > System.out.println(1/2);
        0

##### Additionals

Characters

  - Individual characters such as 'a' or 'A'
  - Represented by `char`
    - `char` takes up **16 bits** of memory (2 bytes)
    - Specified in Java using single quotes `'a'`.

Boolean

  - Represented by `boolean` and has two possible values of `true` and `false`
  - While boolean could be represented by just _one bit_, the size of a boolean
    if up to the virtual machine.

##### Casting

  - Casting is used to get the correct result from the division of two integers.

        > System.out.println((double) 1 / 2);
        0.5
        > System.out.println(1 / (double) 2);
        0.5

However, if we cast the result of the integer division to a double it is too
late since the result has already been calculated after applying the `double`
cast.

    > System.out.println((double) (1/2));
    0.0

#### 2.3.5 Relational Operators

Greater than

    > System.out.println(3 > 2);
    true
    > System.out.println(2 > 3);
    false

Less than

    > System.out.println(’a’ < ’b’);
    true
    > System.out.println(’j’ > ’c’);
    true

Equal to

    > System.out.println(2 == 2);
    true
    > System.out.println(true == false);
    false

Not equal to

    > System.out.println(2 != 2);
    false

Greater than or equal to

    > System.out.println(2 >= 2);
    true

Lesser than or equal to

    > System.out.println(2 <= 2);
    true

#### 2.3.6 Strings

**Strings** are sequences of characters. Java recognize strings (lists of
characters) starting with a `"` double quotes and closing it with another.

    > System.out.println("Mark");
    Mark
    > System.out.println("13 + 5");
    13 + 5

To print doubles quotes `"` inside of a string, you can use `\` backslash
character (escape character) to treat the next character differently.

    > System.out.println("Barb says, \"Hi\".");
    Barb says, "Hi."

> Using `\` in a string also has special uses. For instance, using `\n` will
> tell Java to go to the next line instead of printing the letter _n_.

##### Concatenation

**Appending** or **concatenating** strings are the act of combining strings
together using the `+` operator.

    > System.out.println("Barbara" + "Ericson");
    BarbaraEricson
    > System.out.println("Barbara" + " " + "Ericson");
    Barbara Ericson
    > System.out.println("Barbara " + "Ericson");
    Barbara Ericson
    space inside a string as shown in "Barbara " + "Ericson".
    > System.out.println("The total is " + (13 + 5));
    The total is 18
    > System.out.println("The total is " + 13 + 5);
    The total is 135

### 2.4 Variables

**Variables** are used to store data into memory to be accessed for later use.

#### 2.4.1 Declaring Variables

To access the variables stored into memory, we used variable names. This process
is called _declaring a variable_.

When Declaring a variable in Java you specify the type for the variable and a
name then the value or expression after the `=` sign, `type name = expression`.
You need to specify a type so that Java knows how many bits to reserve in memory
and how to interpret the bits.

#### 2.4.2 Using Variables in Calculations

    > int numPeople = 2;
    > System.out.println(numPeople);
    2
    > double bill = 32.45;
    > System.out.println(bill);
    32.45
    > double tip = bill * 0.2;
    > System.out.println(tip);
    6.490000000000001
    > double total = bill + tip;
    > System.out.println(total);
    38.940000000000005
    > double totalPerPerson = total / numPeople;
    > System.out.println(totalPerPerson);
    19.470000000000002

#### 2.4.3 Memory Maps of Variables

When declaring a variable in Java, it sets aside a space in the memory based
from the type of variable being stored and remembers the location of that space
with an address. e.g., The code `int number` reserves 32 bits of space and
associates the name "number" with that reserved space.

#### 2.4.4 Object Variables

**Object variables** are variables declared to be of any type other than the
primitive types: _byte_, _short_, _int_, _long_, _float_, _double_, _boolean_,
or _char_. This is because all other types _inherit_ from the class **Object**.

> Inheritance is saying that one class "is a kind of" another class. For
instance, a dog is an animal (its primitive type) that is of mammal kind (its
class). Therefore, the dog is of class mammal and _inherits_ the characteristics
of its class, while a fish is also if type animal but does not inherit the
primitive characteristics of the four legged dog that is of class mammal.

**String** is an array of `char` and is not a member of the _Object_ class.
However it inherits from the _Object_ class and creates a type of its own.

    > String test;
    > System.out.println(test);
    null
    > test = "Hi";
    > System.out.println(test);
    Hi
    > test = new String("Bye");
    > System.out.println(test);
    Bye
    When the variable test was declared

> Once the variable have been reassigned to a new value, the space of which the
variable was once referring to will be reused and put back into available
spaces. This is called `garbage collection`.

Java automatically handles freeing used memory when it is no longer needed. When
a memory was no longer in use and was never freed, it is called _memory leak_.

#### 2.4.5 Reusing Variables

Once we have declared variables we can reuse them by assigning new values to
them.

    > String myName = "Mark";
    > System.out.println(myName);
    Mark
    > myName = "Barb";
    > System.out.println(myName);
    Barb

> Variables versus Literals: _Variables_ can be reassigned as many times as you
hence we call it variables. On the other hand, _Literals_ stays the same and the
value of it will never change. e.g.,  Sring literals such as "Hi". You can set
the value of a variable to a literal but you can't set the value of a literal to
a variable.

#### 2.4.6 Multiple References to an Object

    > String name1 = "Suzanne Clark";
    > System.out.println(name1);
    Suzanne Clark
    > String name2 = name1;
    > System.out.println(name2);
    Suzanne Clark

When a string was set to null, its value can now be garbage collected.

    > name1 = null;
    > System.out.println(name1);
    null
    > System.out.println(name2);
    > name2 = null;
    > System.out.println(name2);
    null

## Chapter 3: Introduction to Programming

### 3.1 Programming is About Naming

**Programming language** is a set of names that a computer has encodings for,
such that those names make the computer do expected actions and interpret our
data in expected ways.

### 3.2 Files and Their Names

  * **Hard Disk** Stores all your data after the power of the computer gets
    turned off.
  * **RAM** (Random Access Memory) stores your data impermanently and is
    relatively small. Therefore faster than the _hard disk_.

> However, data must be read from _hard disk_ into memory (RAM) before you can
work with it

### 3.3 Class and Object Methods

Every method or function in Java must be defined inside a class.

Two types of methods in Java: _class methods_ or _object methods_.

**Class Methods**

  - Are methods that can be executed using the class name or on an object of the
    class.
  - Class methods are used for general methods that **don't pertain to a
    particular object**.
  - Defined using the keyword `static`.

**Object Methods**

  - Work with a particular object's data (the object the method was called on).

#### 3.3.1 Invoking Class Methods

_Class Methods_ can be invoked (executed) by using the class name followed by a
period and then the method name: `ClassName.methodName();`.

  - By convention, class names in Java start with an _uppercase_ letter: like
    the _Character_ class.

**Character class** is a wrapper class for the primitive type `char`. It also
provides general character methods

    > System.out.println(Character.getNumericValue(’A’));
    10

**Wrapper Classes**

  - Are classes that you use to "wrap" around _primitive types_ in order to
    have an object to work with.

> Many general purpose classes in Java such as the collection classes (List and
Set) require the values that you add to the collections to be objects. Since
primitive types are not objects you wouldn’t be able to use them in collections
(prior to Java version 5.0). However, if you wrap a primitive type with a
wrapper object you will be able to use it with classes that require objects. As
of Java version 5.0 (also called jdk 1.5) the wrapping of a primitive value is
automatically done when it is needed. This is called boxing and unboxing.

Another class method that’s built in to the Math class in Java is named `abs`--
it’s the _absolute value_ function. It returns the absolute value of the input
numeric value.

    > System.out.println(Math.abs(1));
    1
    > System.out.println(Math.abs(-1));
    1

#### 3.3.2 Executing Object Methods

Object methods are methods that **must** be executed on an object using
`objectReference.methodName();`.

An object reference can be the name of an object variable. You can't invoke
object methods using the class name like you can with class methods.

Here are some examples of Object methods from the Class `Strings`

    > String name = "Fred Farmer";
    > System.out.println(name);
    Fred Farmer
    > String lowerName = name.toLowerCase();
    > System.out.println(lowerName);
    fred farmer
    > String upperName = name.toUpperCase();
    > System.out.println(upperName);
    FRED FARMER
    > System.out.println(name);
    Fred Farmer

> Notice that the value of name didn’t change even though we invoked the method
toLowerCase on it. All of the String methods that can modify a string don’t
change the original string but instead return a new string with the action done
on that string. We say that strings are _immutable_, meaning that they don’t
change.

### 3.4 Working With Turtles

Creating a program with a _turtle_ object that can move around a _world_ leaving
a trail behind it as it moves forward, turn left or right, or some specified
angle.

#### 3.4.1 Defining Classes

In order to create a turtle and its world to move about, we need to define it by
using classes. _World_ and _Turtle_ class. In Java, each new class is usually
defined in a file with the same name as the class and an extension of ".java".

  * Class names start with a capital letter and the first letter of each
    additional word is capitalized.

#### 3.4.2 Creating Objects

Object-oriented programs consist of objects. The class knows what each object of
that class needs to keep track of and what it should be able to do, so the class
creates the objects of that class. You can **think of a class as an object
factory**. The factory can create many objects.

To create and initialize an object use `new Class(parameterList)` where the
parameter list is a list of items used to initialize the new object.

One way to create an object of the class _World_ is to use the `new World()`

> We don't have to pass any parameters to initialize a class all the time.
Objects can have default values.

    > System.out.println(new World());
    A 640 by 480 world with 0 turtles in it.

A blank window should pop out after executing this command. However it will only
be garbaged collected after you close the window as it wasn't stored in a
variable.

To declare a variable in Java you must give the type of the variable and a name
for it:

    Type name;

The `Type` is the name of the class if you are creating a variable that refers
to an object.

> Remember, by convention, class names need to be Capitalized each addition
word. Also variable names, also by convention, starts with lowercased letters
and capitalizes each addition words after the first.

    > World worldObj = new World();
    > System.out.println(worldObj);
    A 640 by 480 world with 0 turtles in it.

This says to create a variable with the name of worldObj that will be of type
World (will refer to an object of the class World). It will refer to the object
created by the World class because of the code: new World(). We can use
`System.out.println(worldObj)` to ask the new World object to print out some
information about itself.

To create a turtle object in this world we will again use:

    new Class (parameterList)

This time we will ask the Turtle class to create the object in our World by
passing a reference to the world to create it in.

    > Turtle turtle1 = new Turtle(worldObj);
    > System.out.println(turtle1);
    No name turtle at 320, 240 heading 0.

To create another turtle in a specific location

    > Turtle turtle2 = new Turtle(30,50,worldObj);
    > System.out.println(turtle2);
    No name turtle at 30, 50 heading 0.

#### 3.4.3 Sending Messages to Objects

A way to make an object of a class do something is to send a message to it. The
full syntax for sending a message is:

    objectReference.message(parameterList);

To use in on our turtle

    > turtle1.forward(20);
    > turtle1.turnLeft();
    > turtle1.forward(30);
    > turtle1.turnRight();
    > turtle1.forward(40);
    > turtle1.turn(-45);
    > turtle1.forward(30);
    > turtle1.turn(90);
    > turtle1.forward(20);

    > turtle2.turnRight();
    > turtle2.forward(200);
    > turtle2.turnRight();
    > turtle2.forward(200);

#### 3.4.5 Additional Turtle Capabilities

  - `backward(amount)` go backward amount of pixels
  - `hide()`stops the turtle from drawing itself
  - `show()` starts the turtle to draw itself again
  - `penUp()` stops the turtle to leave its trail behind
  - `pendown()` start the turtle to leave its trail behind
  - `setPenWidth(width)`  set the pen width to width pixels
  - `moveTo(x, y)` ask the turtle to move to a specific location or coordinate
  - `setName()` sets a name for the turtle for when you print it.

```
> World world1 = new World();
> Turtle turtle1 = new Turtle(50,50,world1);
> turtle1.setName("Jane");
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.penUp();
> turtle1.moveTo(200,200);
> turtle1.hide();
> turtle1.penDown();
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> turtle1.turnRight();
> turtle1.forward(30);
> System.out.println(turtle1);
Jane turtle at 200, 200 heading 0.
```

## References

  - [Intro to Computing and Programming in Java](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/CISC-190/java_book_mediaComp_ch1-4.pdf)
  - [Getting Started with Dr. Java](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AxRCoRMpPy4)
  - [Getting Started PDF Slides](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/CISC-190/turtle.pdf)

