---
title: CISC 190 Module 3 Notes
summary: Working with media and Java loops and arrays
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-02-26
---


# Module 3: Loops and Arrays

## Chapter 3: Introduction to Programming

### 3.6 Working With Media

```java
FileChooser.pickAFile();
```

  - Lets you choose a file using a dialog box. Then returns the full path of the
    file chosen.

#### Arrays

Created using the square brackets `[]`

For example:

```java
Int[] intArray = {12, 1, -3, 100, 4}
```

This will create an array of type integers with 5 values inside

To index an array (get a certain value from the array), we use `intArray[n]`,
being the index number starting from 0.

It may sound strange to say the first element of an array is at index 0 but the
index is based on the distance from the beginning of the array to the element.
Since the first item of the array is at the beginning of the array, the distance

Array values are stored one after the other in memory. This makes it easy to
find any element of the array by multiplying the size of each element by the
index and adding to the address of the beginning of the array. If you are
looking for the element at index 3 in an array, and the size of each element is
4 bytes long, and the array starts at memory location 26, then the 3rd element
is at ($3 \cdot 4 + 26$) or at location 38.

#### 3.6.4 Object References

**Object references** or **object variables** are type of variable that is not a
of _primitive type_ (int, float, double, etc.).
  - Unlike primitive variables, object variables do not Reserve space for the
    value of the variable. The amount of space you need for an object depends on
    the number and types of fields (data) each object of that class has.
  - Object variables (references) reserve space for a _reference_ to an object
    of the given class. A reference allows the computer to _determine_ the
    address of the actual object (it isn't just the address of the object).


## Chapter 4: Modifying Pictures using Loops

**Pixel**

  - Short for _pixel element_.
  - Each color component (sometimes called a _channel_) in a pixel is typically
    represented with a single byte, eight bits. Eight bits can represent 256
    patterns. We typically use these patterns to represent the values 0 to 255.
  - Each pixel uses 24 bits (or three 8 bytes for each of the RGB colors).
  - There are $2^{24}$ (16,777,216 colors) possible patterns of 0's and 1's in
    those 24 bits

**Matrix**

  - A two-dimensional array.
    * _row-major order_ is an arrangement of a 2D matrix that is ordered by the
      row.
    * _column-major order_ specifies the column first then the row.

**Java Field**

  - Is a variable inside a class.
  - Invoked using dot notation but without parenthesis

**Packages**

  - A package is a group of related classes used for a particular purpose.
    * `import packageName` is the syntax used to import a class or all of them
      (by using asterisk `*`) from the package.
    * Importing doesn't make your class larger, it is just used to determine
      what class you mean.

> Picture data is represented as a column-major two-dimensional array.

### Color Representations

**RGB color model**

  - Color model that encodes the colors Red, Green, Blue, respectively.
  - Combining all three gives us pure white. While turning off all three gives
    us black.
  - Most popular model on computers.

**HSV color model**

  - Encodes Hue, Saturation, and Value, respectively.
  - Sometimes also called the _HSB_ color model for Hue, Saturation and
    brightness.
  - The advantage of HSV is that it maps colors cleanly when making it "lighter"
    or "darker."

**CMYK color model**

  - Encodes Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, and blacK ("B" could be confused with Blue).
  - The CMMYK model is what printers use.
  - However, the four elements means more to encode on a computer, so it's less
    popular for media computation.

#### Picture Object Methods

Methods:

  - `show()`               = Displays the picture object
  - `getWidth()`           = Returns the width of the picture object
  - `getHeight()`          = Returns the height of the picture object
  - `write("picture.jpg")` = Write the picture object into a file
  - `repaint()`            = Repaints the picture object to apply changes
  - `explore()`            = Makes a copy of the picture object and opens a dialog window for interactive editing.

#### Pixel Object Methods

Methods:

  - `getPixel(x, y)` = Gets any particular pixel from a picture object
  - `getPixels()`    = Gets all the pixels from a picture object into an array
  - `getX()`         = Gets the pixel's X coordinate
  - `getY()`         = Gets the pixel's Y coordinate
  - `getRed()`       = Gets the R value or channel from the given pixel object
  - `getGreen()`     = Gets the G value or channel from the given pixel object
  - `getBlue()`      = Gets the B value or channel from the given pixel object
  - `setRed()`       = Sets the R value or channel of the given pixel object
  - `setGreen()`     = Sets the G value or channel of the given pixel object
  - `setBlue()`      = Sets the B value or channel of the given pixel object
  - `getColor()`     = Gets the pixel object's RGB color
  - `setColor()`     = Sets the pixel object's RGB color

#### Color Object Methods

Package:

  - `import java.awt.Color;`

Methods:

  - `new Color(red,green,blue)` = Creates an returns a Color object
  - `darker()`                  = Automatically gets darker color from a color object
  - `lighter()`                 = Automatically gets lighter color from a color object

Additional non-Color class method

  - `ColorChooser.pickAColor()` = Gives a variety of ways of picking a color

> Darkening or brightening colors sometimes doesn't match exactly the original
color. This is due to _rounding errors_, which happens as a result of
calculations done in floating point but is stored into an integer.

##### Predefined Color fields

Syntax:

  - `Color.black`, with no parenthesis, will produce the predefined color black.

> You can use all capital letters for the color names, `Color.BLACK`.

Other predefined colors in the Color class

  - `Color.RED`
  - `Color.GREEN`
  - `Color.BLUE`
  - `Color.YELLOW`
  - `Color.GRAY`
  - `Color.ORANGE`
  - `Color.PINK`
  - `Color.CYAN`
  - `Color.MAGENTA`
  - `Color.BLACK`
  - `Color.WHITE`

### 4.3.1 Using a For-Each Loop

Loops through each elements of an array.

Syntax:
```java
for (Type variableName : array)
{
  // commands to be done inside loop
}
```

### 4.3.2 Using While Loops

Executes a statements (command) or a group of statements in a block.

Syntax:
```java
while (test)
{
  // commands to be done inside loop
}
```

Example:
```java
int count = 0;
while (count < target)
{
  // commands to be done inside loop
  count = count + 1;
}
```

### 4.3.7 Using a For Loop

A for loop executes a command or group of commands in block

Syntax:
```java
for (initialization area; continuation test; change area)
{
  /* commands in body of the loop */
}
```

References
=====

  - [Intro to Computing and Programming in Java](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/CISC-190/java_book_mediaComp_ch1-4.pdf)
    * Chapter 3.6 & 4
