---
title: Chapter 13
subtitle: Quiz and homework
author: Mark Lucernas
date: Nov 22, 2020
---


# Chapter 13

## Homework

### Q1

Pegging Interest Rates. Suppose the Federal Reserve wanted to fix, or peg, the
level of interest rates at 6 percent.

Use the money demand and money supply graph to the right to show how an increase
in money demand would change the supply of money if the Fed pursued the policy
of this fixed interest rate.

1. _Use the line drawing tool twice to show the increase in the demand for money
   and what has to happen to the money supply to keep interest rates fixed.
   (You should draw two new lines.) Properly label these lines._

2. _Use the point drawing tool to show the new equilibrium in the money market.
   Label this point 'B.'_

![Homework 1](../../../../files/fall-2020/ECON-120/chapter-14/homework-1.png)

If the Federal Reserve pegs interest rates, it loses some of its control of the
money supply. **True**

### Q2

Recessions and Interest Rates. Suppose the economy starts to head into a
recession.

Use a graph of the money market and show what happens to interest rates.

1. _Use the line drawing tool to show the change in the demand for money.
   Properly label this line._

2. _Use the point drawing tool to show the new equilibrium in the money market.
   Label this point 'B.'_

![Homework 2](../../../../files/fall-2020/ECON-120/chapter-14/homework-2.png)

From the graph, we can clearly see that the interest rate will **decrease**.

When interest rates decrease, we know that the price of bonds will **increase**.

### Q3

Rising Prices and the Money Market. Suppose the economy experiences an increase
in prices.

Use a graph of the money market and show what happens to interest rates.

1. _Use the line drawing tool to show the change in the demand for money.
   Properly label this line._

2. _Use the point drawing tool to show the new equilibrium in the money market.
   Label this point 'B'._

![Homework 3](../../../../files/fall-2020/ECON-120/chapter-14/homework-3.png)

From the graph, we can clearly see that the interest rate will **increase**.

### Q4

The following table shows data from FRED* on the Japan/U.S foreign exchange rate
(yen/\$) and U.S. exports to Japan for May 01, 2020 and June 01, 2020.

| Date          | Exchange Rate (yen/$) | U.S. Exports to Japan |
|---------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| May 01, 2020  | 107.2000              | \$4,800.0 million     |
| June 01, 2020 | 107.5782              | \$4,776.5 million     |

*Real-time data provided by Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), Federal
Reserve Bank of Saint Louis.

Given the (yen/\$) exchange rate shown above for June 01 comma 2020 , the
U.S/Japan foreign exchange rate (\$/yen) on that date was **0.0093**.

Given the change in the exchange rate between May and June, did U.S. exports to
Japan change in a way that economic theory would predict?

**D. Yes. Since the dollar appreciated against the yen, economic theory would
predict that U.S. exports to Japan would decrease.**

## Quiz

### Q1

**Side Effects of Supporting a Currency**. Suppose United States' currency came
under attack by speculators and to prevent the value of its currency from
falling, the central bank needed to raise interest rates.

What would be the side effect of such a policy?

**C. Net exports will fall.**

### Q2

An ATM Next to Your Apartment Building. Suppose an ATM connected to your own
bank is installed right next to your apartment building.

a. How will this affect the average amount of currency you carry around with
you?

**B. You will carry less currency since it is convenient to leave your money
holdings in the bank earning some interest.**

b. If you withdraw funds at your ATM only from your checking account, will your
action have any effect on total money demand?

**A. No, if this withdrawal is an action that facilitates your normal level of
transactions.**

### Q3 0.50/1

Recessions and Interest Rates. Consider an economy with a negatively sloped
money demand curve and a vertical money supply curve. Suppose the economy starts
to head into a recession.

If the economy starts to head into a recession, the demand for money will
**decrease**, shifting the money demand curve to the **left**.

As a result, interest rates will **decrease**.

When interest rates decrease, we know that the price of bonds will **increase**.

### Q4

Buy or Sell Bonds? If you strongly believed that the Federal Reserve was going
to surprise the markets and decrease interest rates, you would want to
**purchase** bonds.

### Q5

China's Increase in Reserve Requirements. The Chinese government purchased U.S.
dollars in the foreign exchange market with Chinese currency. During the same
period, the Chinese sharply raised the reserve requirement on banks because they
wanted to prevent the money supply from expanding too rapidly.

The effect of the Chinese government's purchase of U.S. dollars in the foreign
exchange market with Chinese currency would be to **increase** the supply of
Chinese currency.

Since the Chinese wanted to prevent the money supply from expanding too rapidly,
they raised the reserve requirement on banks, **reducing** the ability of banks
to make loans, thereby **decreasing** the Chinese money supply.



