---
title: Chapter 12
subtitle: Quiz and homework
author: Mark Lucernas
date: Nov 05, 2020
---


# Chapter 12

## Homework

### Q1

If the interest rate is 4 percent, the present value of \$175 paid one year from
now equals \$**168.27**

> $168.27 = \frac{175}{(1 + 0.04)^{1}}$

If the \$175 is received in two years (at the same interest rate), the present
value will equal \$**161.80**.

> $161.80 = \frac{175}{(1 + 0.04)^{2}}$

### Q2

A lottery game offers a prize of $ 150,000

at the end of thirty years.  If the interest rate is 6 %, the present value of
this amount is \$**26117**.

> $\text{ present value } = \frac{150000}{(1 + 0.06)^{30}}$

### Q3

The table below shows the initial cost and next year return for a variety of
projects ITOF Inc. is considering for investment.

| Project | Cost (\$) | Return (\$) |
|---------|-----------|-------------|
| 1       | 100       | 103         |
| 2       | 100       | 110         |
| 3       | 100       | 108         |
| 4       | 100       | 104         |
| 5       | 100       | 107         |

If the current nominal interest rate is 6%, which of the following projects are
profitable?

> $100 \times (1 + 0.06)^{1} = 106$. Profitable at any amount > 106

**C. 2, 3, 5**

### Q4

When a firm's stock price is high, it can issue shares at a premium and use the
proceeds from their sale to finance new investments. The higher a firm's share
price, the **fewer** shares the firm needs to sell to raise capital. This means,
essentially, that the cost of the project the firm wants to undertake **falls**
as the company's stock price climbs. In other words, **high** stock prices lead
to high investment.

### Q5

Why might entrepreneurs and firms use banks for loans instead of going directly
to savers?

**A. Individual investors may ask for a high rate of interest to compensate for their risk.**

**B. Individual investors may not be savvy enough to evaluate the risks of making a loan.**

**C. It is time consuming to pitch an investment idea to many investors instead of one bank.**

## Quiz

### Q1

If the interest rate is 6 percent, the present value of \$175 paid one year from
now equals \$**165.09**. If the \$175 is received in two years (at the same
interest rate), the present value will equal \$**155.75**.

> $165.09 = \frac{175}{(1 + 0.06)^{1}}$

> $155.75 = \frac{175}{(1 + 0.04)^{2}}$

### Q2

Investment is a **smaller** portion of GDP than consumption, but is
substantially **more** volatile.

Investment rises

**B. sharply during booms and falls sharply during recessions.**

### Q3

If the nominal interest rate is 3.8% and the inflation rate is 2.5%, the real
interest rate is **1.3**%

> $\text{ Real interest rate } = \text{ nominal interest rate } - \text{ inflation rate }$

### Q4

Explaining the Name of the Theory. Consider both terms in the name of the
"multiplier-accelerator" theory.

The accelerator refers to the

**B. fact that investment depends on the change (or acceleration) in the rate of
investment.**

The multiplier refers to the  

**A. impact of investment spending on GDP.**


### Q5

Stock Prices, Interest Rates, and Corporate Earnings.

a. Holding other factors constant, stock prices tend to fall when expected
corporate earnings fall because lower expected corporate earnings **decrease**
investors' expectations about future dividends, **decreasing** the demand for
stock and stock prices.

b. When interest rates rise, higher interest rates make borrowing **more**
expensive, **reducing** the total level of investment. All other things being
equal, when investment spending falls, stock prices **fall**.

