---
title: Chapter 13
subtitle: Quiz and homework
author: Mark Lucernas
date: Nov 12, 2020
---


# Chapter 13

## Homework

### Q1

Changes in the Money Multiplier. The figure below depicts the change in the M1
money multiplier in the United States from 2007 to 2018.

The value of the money multiplier **fell** sharply around 2008. Thereafter, its
value remained **below 1** until the end of 2017. Post 2018, its value came
close to **1**. This change in the series was because the Federal Reserve began
paying interest on **reserves**.

### Q2

Suppose a retiree takes all his old coins that have been sitting in large jars
at his house for years to the bank and deposits them. He deposits a total of
\$35,000.

If the required reserve ratio is 9%, this transaction could increase the
overall money supply by $.

$$
\text{ Total Increase in Checking Account Balances } = \text{ Increase in Excess Reserves } \times \frac{1}{\text{Required Reserve Ratio}} \\
\text{ Total Increase in Checking Account Balances } = \frac{\$35,000}{0.09} = \$388,889 \\
\text{ Total Increase in Overall Money Supply } = 388,889 - \$35,000 = \$353,889
$$

### Q3

If \$100 is deposited into a checking account in a bank, then the money supply:

B. does not change.

If the bank that received the \$100 deposit keeps 2 % of it as reserves and
loans out the remainder, then the money supply will increase by \$**98**.

> $100 - 100(0.02) = 98$

The money multiplier provides the maximum
increase in checking account balances for any initial cash deposit. It is given
by the ratio:

C. $\frac{1}{\text{Reserve ratio}}$

Thus, if the reserve ratio is 2 %, then the money multiplier is **50**.

> $\frac{1}{0.02} = 50$

If the reserve ratio is 2% for all banks, banks hold no excess reserves and
checking account balances increase by the full amount of all loans made, then
the initial \$100 deposit will result in a maximum increase in checking account
balances throughout all of the banks of \$**5000**

> $100 \times \frac{1}{0.02} = 5000$

and increase the money supply by \$**4900**.

> $100 \times \frac{1}{0.02} - 100 = 4900$

### Q4

**Balance sheet**: An account statement for a bank that shows the sources of its
funds (liabilities) as well as the uses of its funds (assets).

**Liabilities**: The sources of funds for a bank, including deposits and owners'
equity.  Assets: The uses of the funds of a bank, including loans and reserves.

**Owners' equity**: The funds provided to a bank by its owners.

**Reserves**: The portion of banks' deposits set aside in either vault cash or
as deposits at the Federal Reserve.

**Required reserves**: The specific fraction of their deposits that banks are
required by law to hold as reserves.  Excess reserves: Any additional reserves
that a bank holds above required reserves.

## Assignment

### Q1

Which of these is NOT included in M1?

**C. savings deposits**

### Q2

Suppose a retiree takes all his old coins that have been sitting in large jars
at his house for years to the bank and deposits them. He deposits a total of
\$20,000.  If the required reserve ratio is 6%, this transaction could increase
the overall money supply by \$**313333**.

> $20,000(\frac{1}{0.06}) - 20,000 \approx \$313,333$

### Q3

Credit Cards. Credit cards are not considered part of the money supply because:

**C. they are a loan which you have to use money to pay for later.**

### Q4

Auditing the Fed? In recent years, several members of Congress have sponsored
bills that would subject the Fed to audits of its monetary policy. This is a
form of intensive Congressional oversight. What are the pros and cons of more
Congressional oversight of the Fed?

Increased oversight can

**C. create pressure to help finance a country's government deficit by creating
money.**

### Q5

The most basic measure of money in the United States is called **M1**.

M1 is the sum of:

**D. currency in the hands of the public, demand deposits, other checkable
deposits, and traveler's checks.**

