# Multimodal Project Script

## Slide 1

Introduction

## Slide 2

In this presentation, we will be talking about these topics.

## Slide 3

There was vagabond man back in 412 BC holding a lamp who uttered these words "I
am just looking for a single honest man." But throughout his search, he found
nothing but rascals and scoundrels.

Now what does that mean? That we are liars and not a single soul in this world
who is clean of lying. Who never lied his entire life?

## Slide 4

When you look at this picture, whats the first thing that comes to your mind?
You might be like, Oh that's a cute baby, or that baby is so innocent. No!
Things we never talk about when we see these cute kids, is that these are
little shameless liars. Yes liars.

## Slide 5

**As human beings, research says we lie as early as 2 to 3 years old.**

If you ever watched little kids when they are crying and when an adult or the
child's parent are not around anymore, they would stop crying for a second and
look around to see if someone is watching, then starts crying again once they
see an adult. That right there is a sign of deception as early as in our
toddler or preschool years.

No one taught a child how to lie. Theres no good parent out there who taught
their children to lie, well maybe to not say something on some situations to
preserve a relationship or just be kind and considerate not to entertain public
embarrassment, but to blatantly lie is not normally taught especially to kids.

So who taught them how to lie? Children learned how to hide their toys by
themselves in response to selfishness and fake cry to get what they want. Its a
part of their development. A quote from a blog post in PyschologyToday about
_When Does Lying Begin_ "In 1877, Charles Darwin suggested that children as
young as 30 months are capable of lying after seeing his young son trying to
deceive him."

**We are all instinctive liars. On average, people lie at least 3 times in a
10-minute conversation.**

We are good at it. Lying has been one of our weapons in our arsenal for
survival and we are not the only intelligent creature that can display
deception. Mammals such as gorillas are able to lie as well.

## Slide 6

**At the core, we lie to ourselves because we don't have enough psychological
strength to admit the truth and deal with the consequences that will follow**

We all know this and its obvious. Because most of the time, we lie not because
we are a bad person but because of the consequence that will follow is
terrifying enough to deny the truth to save ourselves from punishments or
embarrassment. And not everyday we have this kind of courage to face the truth
and own up to the fact.

## Slide 7

**Consequences of Lying**

- Trust Issues

We all know this. Theres a chance that we will lose the trust of people if we
constantly lie to them especially when they know that they are being lied to.
We will get a bad reputation for being a liar if we got caught. In some cases,
it will define you and overshadow all the good things you've done just because
you made a lie about something once.

- Lowers self-esteem

Because the nature of lying is concealing the truth and deceiving others,
sometimes about an embarrassing mistake or a blunder that we did, intentional
or not, but regardless, we get used to this feeling of concealing the fact and
choosing over to lie instead of facing the truth which could be damaging to our
self-esteem or self-confidence.

As an example, this can lead to a syndrome called _Impostor syndrome_, a
psychological pattern in which the person constantly doubts his/herself of
personal skills and abilities and have this constant fear of being exposed as a
"fraud". This is common among programmers or developers because programming can
be daunting and easily overwhelming, especially for developers new to the
industry. They might do good in an interview and feel good about their
impression to people, but deep inside, they fear that they are not up to par
with other developers, and worry that they will mess up big time eventually.
All because of the good impression they need to uphold from the initial
interview. And in order to have a good interview, its not uncommon to
sugar-coat some details about your experience or skills that are not
necessarily candid.

- Liars have a hard time maintaining relationships

Just like trust issues among peers, family members or coworkers, liars have
negative effect on the people they lied to directly or indirectly. The lie can
even spread beyond the liar's circle through word of mouth preventing that
person from creating deep relationship with others even before they meet due to
"rumors".

- Lying snowballs

Not only you will get a bad reputation for lying. The next time you lie, it
will be easier because you have lied before. The argument will get better the
next time, you become more confident of your lie because it was tested and you
didn't get caught. But as you lie and constantly cover up, you only get
yourself deeper into trouble than if you just admit to it in the first place.

## Slide 8

"The problem of lying is that its a hydra".

A hydra as a greek legend with multiple snake-like heads, that once a head has
been cut off, two heads well grow from the neck of the decapitated head.
Multiplying by two.

Take the Watergate scandal for one. During the administration of the 37th
president Richard Nixon, the break-in scandal of the Democratic National
Committee headquarters at the Washington, D.C, was denied by the president and
consistently covers up the lie one after another. Which led to this historic
scandal and his resignation as the president of the United States.

Some would argue that if Nixon had initially admitted to the scandal, the turn
of events might have been different for him and this would not have become such
a scandal.

## Slide 9

**Benefits of Lying**

Now if there are consequences to lying, theres also benefits to deception. The
reason why we are such good liars, while being fully aware of the consequences,
is because of the certain advantages in concealing the hard truths.

- Social advantage

We can all relate to this. You might have attended a highschool party before
for the first time and you suddenly feel out place. You don't feel like you
belong in these type of setting and you just wanna get out of there, right?.
But this is high school, for most, it doesn't work that way. So you start
talking to some people having small conversations, trying to find some common
ground to build upon a conversation on. But it seems like you can't find common
interests between you and the people at the party. So what do you do? Stretch
the truth little bit right? They like some rock music, you kinda don't care
listening to some and your brother listens to it everyday anyway, but you said
its your jam! Another social advantage of lying is that it can get you sexual
partner, or a higher social standing.

So those are one of the social advantages of lying. Not necessarily harmful,
but helps you to acclimate to social changes.

- Easy way out

Also, lying is the easy way out of an undesirable situation. And more often
than not, we get away with it. You can get away easily for blaming your dog to
have eaten the last pizza while everyone was away. Or you can lie to your
doctor about regularly exercising when you never even lift a finger at home to
avoid scolding.

- Get out of trouble

It goes without saying that lying can get you out of trouble in some
situations. You might or might not get caught. I don't encourage anyone to lie
in any situation. But for the sake of lying it is one of its benefits.

- Coping mechanism

Lying can also be a coping mechanism for people with low self-esteem or who
have had traumatic experience. There are times we don't want to bring up our
horrible past so we lie about being ok but you are still deeply affected by it.
And also lying is beneficial for people with low self-esteem or who does not
get along very well with people. They lie about their personal interests to
align with the interest of those in their peers so they can sort of "blend in"
and eventually be a part of a group with common interest. You might not like
some of the ideals of that particular group but you never really know until you
experience it firsthand. So theres also a benefit of discovery there as well.

## Slide 10

A quote from the Scientific American, The Art of Lying, "it shows that lying is
a major component of the human behavioral repertoire; without it, we would have
a hard time coping."

## Slide 11

I included this short video from The Behavioral Science Guys with two best
selling authors, David Maxfield and Joseph Grenny, about one of the reason why
we lie in certain situations mainly for personal benefit and how to mitigate or
discourage people to be truthful.

WATCH VIDEO

As mentioned in the video, we are not horrible people, but rather all morally
asleep and needs constant reminder or a psychological "nudge" to wake your
conscience up and do the right thing.

## Slide 12

Furthermore, compulsive or pathological liars are a master at self-deception.
So when they tell the lie, they “wholeheartedly” believe their lies.

## Slide 13

California researchers found that pathological liars have about 25 percent more
white matter in their prefrontal cortex and 14 percent less of the grey matter
than normal people (part of the brain for critical thinking).

The surplus of white matter suggests that pathological liars are quick to make
connections in their brain and really good at keeping all the information in
their head in order to sustain the lie.

Consequently, the shortage of grey matter makes it hard for them to keep a
stable relationship with people for thinking less critically.

## Slide 14

Now this leads us to the final question. "Is lying beneficial or detrimental?"

My own take to this topic, is that deception, whether towards others or
ourselves, does more harm than good. Because lying in my opinion, is addictive.
The act of lying without consequences feels good and affirms the liars thoughts
that its ok to lie and you can do away with it. Its easy and its free. However,
this kind of mentality builds upon the person's personality and affect how
he/she deals with life in general. One study from Researchers at the University
of Notre Dame suggests that liars are less healthy than people who are more
honest because lying can be stressful and affects good standing with people.

Conversely, deception can also be used to do good by others. It also helps us
to cope or get by during uncomfortable social situations, such as being new to
a place where you haven't established relationships with others and are having
a hard time blending in. Theres also "white" lies that does not benefit the
liar itself, but benefits others by concealing facts that would otherwise hurt
someone's feeling or self-esteem.

Lying can make or break relationships, and its up to our discretion when to use
or where to apply this skill that we learned since we were innocent little
kids. Not so innocent if we think about it. Just be sure we are well aware of
the consequences this little tool in our repertoire, and use it wisely and
fairly.

