---
title: The United States of Paranoia Part 2 Ch 12
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-07-11
summary: The United States of Paranoia by Jesse Walker Part 2 Ch 12
---


# Chapter 12: Everything is a Clue

"October 7, 2001: less than a month after 9/ 11. Police in Maryland decide that
two trucks on Interstate 270 might be carrying explosives. The alert cops block
traffic for an hour, searching the vehicles for tools of terror. The cargo turns
out to be stage equipment headed to a memorial service for the firefighters
killed in the attack. A forgivable mistake, given the circumstances? Perhaps."
(p. 299).

"It was the same species of fear that had flared during earlier hunts for spies
and saboteurs. But now the consequences of failing to spot the conspirators
seemed much more catastrophic. Anything might be a weapon; anything might be a
clue." (p. 300).

"In January 2007, guerrilla marketers erected illuminated signs in locations
around ten cities, each displaying one of the Mooninite characters from the Aqua
Teen Hunger Force TV cartoon. In nine of those cities, the campaign went off
without incident, but in Boston the cops construed the signs as bombs and
essentially locked down the town. On learning that the installations were not
explosives, officials started calling them a "hoax," as though the advertisers
had expected people to mistake the Mooninites for weapons. "It had a very
sinister appearance," Massachusetts attorney general Martha Coakley said of one
of the signs. "It had a battery behind it, and wires."" (p. 302).

"When people enter an apocalyptic frame of mind, the historian Richard Landes has
observed, "everything quickens, enlightens, coheres. They become semiotically
aroused- everything has meaning, patterns."" (p. 302).

"One frequently forwarded e-mail gave readers instructions on how to fold a $ 20
bill, revealing an image that seemed to predict the planes hitting the towers:"
(p. 302).

"The sociologists who study disasters are wary about using the word panic. In
real-world disasters, as we noted in chapter 3, genuine panic is rare and
spontaneous social cooperation is the norm. But in 2008, the Rutgers
sociologists Lee Clarke and Caron Chess suggested that events like Katrina can
spark something they called an elite panic. When the hurricane hit New Orleans,
there were rumors that dozens of dead bodies were stacked in the convention
center where refugees had taken shelter, that men were firing weapons at the
helicopters coming to rescue them, that roving bands of rapists were assaulting
people willy-nilly, that survivors of the storm had turned to cannibalism. 19
"Misinformed about conditions on the ground and overly fearful of the loss of
property," Clarke and Chess wrote, "officials turned resources away from rescue
in New Orleans. Elites responding after Katrina were disconnected from
non-elites and obviously fearful of them. Further, their actions and inactions
created greater danger for others."" (pp. 306-307).

"The first decade of the twenty-first century saw three particularly notable
eruptions of elite paranoia. The first came with the reactions to the 9/ 11
attacks. The second was the response to Katrina, when powerful people's fears
both fed and were reinforced by the centralization and militarization of
disaster relief. And the third began when Barack Obama became president, as
commentators treated a group of unconnected crimes as a grand, malevolent
movement." (p. 307).

"As is often the case with paranoid perspectives, this connect-the-dots fantasy
said more about the tellers' anxieties than it did about any order actually
emerging in the world." (p. 307).

"On June 10, 2009, an elderly man entered the Holocaust museum, raised a rifle,
and opened fire, killing a security guard named Stephen Tyrone Johns. Two other
guards shot back, wounding the gunman before he could kill anyone else. The
killer was soon identified as James Wenneker von Brunn, an eighty-eight-year-old
neo-Nazi. Von Brunn acted alone, but there was no shortage of voices eager to
spread the blame for his crime. Pundits quickly linked the murder, in a
free-associative way, to the assassination ten days earlier of the Kansas
abortionist George Tiller. This, we were told, was a “pattern” of “rising
right-wing violence.”" (pp. 307-308).

"Crime wave thus established, the analysts moved on to denounce the unindicted
instigators. Those weren't just killers, the narrative went; they were killers
inflamed by demagogues." (p. 308).

"The charitable reading of this passage is that it's a sloppily phrased attempt
to list the ideas that drive various right-wing extremists, not a declaration
that anyone opposed to abortion or prone to "rejecting federal authority" is a
threat. 27 But even under that interpretation, the report is inexcusably vague.
It focuses on extremism itself, not on violence, and there's no reason to
believe that its definition of "extremist" is limited to people with violent
inclinations." (p. 309).

"Threat reports that focus on ideology instead of criminal activity are
threatening to civil liberties and a wholly ineffective use of federal security
resources."" (p. 309).

"And in the press, the new Brown Scare continued to flourish, as incidents were
uncritically presented as evidence that political rhetoric was inciting
political violence." (p. 310).

"I asked Malcolm Wiley, a Secret Service spokesman, about the claim. He wouldn't
give out the correct figures, but he denied that Kessler's number was correct.
According to Wiley, there was a period while Obama was still a candidate when he
had received more threats than the sitting president. "But since he became
president, that has leveled off," he continued. "The number of threats he has
received has been consistent with the number received by Bush, Clinton, Reagan,
and others."" (p. 311).

"In the absence of more detailed data, it isn't obvious what factors fueled the
increase. But when someone decides to assault an IRS employee, one government
official told me, it's "usually a personal event that's a catalyst."" (p. 312).

"Krugman declared that "toxic rhetoric" was the force compelling them to act
out." (p. 312).

"The biggest problem with the SPLC list is that it lumps together a very varied
set of organizations, blurring the boundary between people who might have
sympathy for aggressive violence and people who would want no part of it.
“Generally,” the center explains, the groups on its Patriot roster “define
themselves as opposed to the ‘New World Order,’ engage in groundless conspiracy
theorizing, or advocate or adhere to extreme antigovernment doctrines.” 42 That
covers a lot of ground. Using such a list to track the threat of right-wing
terrorism is like tracking the threat of jihadist terrorism by counting the
country’s mosques." (p. 313).

"Perliger's data did indeed show such an increase, though he also included an
important caveat. The "quality of, and accessibility to, data on hate crimes and
far right violence has improved during the last two decades," he noted, so "we
need to take this into consideration when interpreting findings relating to
fluctuations in levels of violence."" (p. 315).

"In 2009 and 2010- the period when the "rising right-wing violence" narrative was
ubiquitous in the media- the number of violent right-wing incidents was actually
declining. Let me repeat that: As pundits were issuing frantic warnings about
the great beast stirring in the fever swamps, the number of attacks was going
down." (p. 316).

"Some Tea Partiers were prone to conspiracy theories of their own, from the claim
that Obama's health care bill would establish "death panels" to the familiar
charge that FEMA was preparing internment camps. Discussions of the movement
frequently highlighted such theories, often arguing that they proved the Right
had "gone" (p. 317).

"That said, the most notable right-wing conspiracy theory of the period was not
particularly libertarian. I refer to the idea that Barack Obama and his allies
are covering up the true circumstances of the president's birth. The exact
details of the story vary from theorist to theorist, but the usual payoff is
that Obama was born in Kenya, not Hawaii, and therefore is ineligible for the
presidency." (pp. 317-318).

"[Barack Obama] spent a chunk of his childhood in Indonesia. His father came
from Kenya. When young Obama did live in the United States, he was in Hawaii,
the one American state that isn't actually a part of the Americas. If you don't
conceive of the United States as a multicultural nation, the president's life is
reason enough to consider the man metaphorically foreign. And if there's one
thing conspiracy theories are good at, it's transmuting the metaphorical into
the real." (p. 319).

"Birtherism wasn't just paranoid in itself. It fed the paranoid narrative about
"rising right-wing violence," as when Heidi Beirich of the Southern Poverty Law
Center told NPR that birther-style theories might presage another Oklahoma City
bombing." (p. 320).

"The airwaves and Internet were quickly clogged with claims that Loughner had
been incited by talk radio, by violent political imagery, by right-wing
conspiracy theories," (p. 320).

"Nearly everything in the previous paragraph is untrue. There never was a boy
band called Boy* d Upp, there never was a pop star named Jamie Kane, he never
faced a scandal, he never died, and no one ever mourned him. The BBC did report
his death, though, and an outline of his alleged career did surface briefly in
Wikipedia. And when people realized that those fictions were appearing in venues
theoretically devoted to fact, the whiff of foul play did waft through the air."
(p. 325).

"And people have found that symbolism everywhere, from music videos to superhero
movies: a massive clue hunt across the entire pop-culture landscape." (p. 329).

"By the time Prodigy accused Jay-Z of being a member of the Illuminati, Adam
Weishaupt's organization had become the stuff of celebrity gossip; tattoos, hand
gestures, and video imagery all became fodder for fans determined to figure out
which performers were initiates of the order. You can get the flavor of the
fears from an exchange the rapper 50 Cent had on a Philadelphia radio station in
2009." (pp. 329-330).

"There had never been a game. The man behind the site "just thought it would be
funny to put up some creepy notes and see what sort of attention they got," the
MetaFilter writer explained. When people decided it was an ARG, "he decided to
play along. The numerical ‘codes' he sent out? Random numbers and dates plucked
out of the air." He provided the noise; the players perceived the pattern. They
imagined a labyrinth as elaborate as bin Laden's legendary fortress in Tora
Bora. They found an empty cave." (p. 332).

"The conspiracy theorist will always be with us, because he will always be us.
We will never stop finding patterns. We will never stop spinning stories. We
will always be capable of jumping to conclusions," (p. 338).


Reading response 5 ideas

  - Demagogues incites violence and personal political views exacerbate
    sometimes the cause of paranoia.
  - Mental illness shallow explanation of social disturbance?
  - Inaccurate statistics causes unnecessary paranoia


<br>

# Resources

  - Walker, Jesse. _The United States of Paranoia_. Harper. Kindle Edition.
