---
title: The United States of Paranoia Part 2 Ch 9
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-07-06
summary: The United States of Paranoia by Jesse Walker Part 2 Ch 9
---


# Chapter 9: Operation Mindfuck

"In 1969, The East Village Other was the trippiest paper in New York: a
kaleidoscopic combination of absurdist headlines and psychedelic graphics that
made The Village Voice look as stuffy as The New York Times. The actual articles
could be pretty freaky too: outré stuff about LSD and UFOs, sex and revolution.
And conspiracies." (p. 219).

"A certain class of reader values bizarre and paranoid theories precisely
because they are bizarre and paranoid", Thomas M. Disch (p. 221).

"In the ironic style, the most interesting thing about a conspiracy theory isn’t
that it might or might not be true; it’s that it constructs a story out of the
everyday truths we only hazily perceive." (p. 221).

"Keel's book mentions that "a few of the ego-tripping characters in ufology" were
prone to "placing prank calls," but the author seems oblivious to the fact
that Barker was one of them:" (p. 225).

"Krassner had simply assumed that everyone would be able to tell the satiric from
the sincere. When it turned out that many readers found that difficult, he
didn't look for ways to clear up the confusion; he looked for ways to have fun
with it" (pp. 227-228)

"When LBJ had been competing with Kennedy for the 1960 presidential nomination,
he had called his rival's father a Nazi sympathizer. The article went on to
describe the president's infidelities, which were well known in journalistic
circles but had not yet been reported, and then it grew steadily less reliable,
concluding with a scene of Lyndon Baines sticking his Johnson in the president's
throat wound. It is a testament to Krassner's literary skill- or the average
reader's gullibility, or LBJ's unpopularity- that many people were fooled." (p.
228).

"1960s... the Report from Iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of
Peace... a conclave tasked with considering what Washington should do if a
"general condition of peace" should break out. War is a social stabilizer,
the purported panel concluded. It allows planners to judiciously burn off excess
economic inventory, it channels "antisocial elements" into "an acceptable role,"
it establishes "the basic authority of a modern state over its people," and it
helps "preserve whatever quality and degree of poverty a society requires as an
incentive."" (p. 229).

"'Peace Scare Drives Market Down.'... The book's primary author, Leonard Lewin,
confessed to the hoax in 1972, but that didn't stop people from believing the
Report was real." (p. 230).

"People still tout the Report as a genuine window into the mind of the Enemy
Above. Some of them don't seem to be aware of Lewin's confession; others know
about it but just don't believe it. "The government claimed it was a HOAX,"
wrote Stewart Best" (p. 230).

"The only problem with all of this is the simple fact that IT WAS PUBLISHED AS
NON-FICTION, and it was claimed at the time of the release that it was AUTHENTIC
by both Lewen [sic] and the Editor-in-Chief of Dial Press." 32 You might get the
impression that Best does not comprehend how a hoax works." (pp. 230-231)
Edition.

"The purpose of The Discordian Society is to provide false, comforting answers
to questions of this sort; to give mystical reasons for the disorder around us;
to promote unworkable principles of discord- in short, to provide the world with
a workshop for the insane, thus keeping them out of mischief as Presidents,
Ambassadors, Priests, Ministers, and other Dictators." (p. 233).

"Discordians, they decided, were discouraged from praying, prohibited from
eating hot dog buns, and encouraged to break the prohibition on eating hot dog
buns.  And every Discordian was a pope. Or at least all the male Discordians
were. The women were called momes." (p. 233).

"Order, the Discordians argued, is in the eye of the beholder. "The real reality
is there," the Principia explained, "but everything you KNOW about ‘it' is in
your mind and yours to do with as you like. Conceptualization is art, and YOU
ARE THE ARTIST."" (p. 233).

"Wilson's writing was marked both by skepticism and by a playful willingness to
suspend his skepticism. He believed conspiracies were "standard mammalian
politics," but he also recognized, as in his comments about Webster, that
conspiracy theories often revealed more about the theorist than they did about
the actual objects of the theorizing." (p. 234).

"Many of them congratulated me on the number of my predictions that came true,
although actually none of them ever came true." Wilson (p. 238).

"Operation Mindfuck, a free-form art project that was part political protest,
part parade of pranks." (p. 239).

%% use this
"that Wilson, himself, was an Illuminati agent attempting to lampoon and
discredit conspiracy theories." Others, on the other hand, "felt sure he was
doing his best to slip the truth past Establishment censors by disguising the
truth as a titillating parody." (p. 244).

"McAlpine didn't share Wilson's sense of the absurd, but he did agree about the
importance of exploring multiple perspectives." (p. 245).

"Drummond had told Stang as they were inventing the faith. "Let's just call it
The Conspiracy." This wouldn't be just any old cabal. "It's not just the people
who shot JFK or the crashed flying saucer in Area 51 or Roswell," Stang later
explained. "It's everybody. Every normal person is out to get every abnormal
person. Just instinctively." (pp. 250-251)


## Vocabs

  - Rosicrucian = a member of a secretive 17th- and 18th-century society devoted
    to the study of metaphysical, mystical, and alchemical lore.
  - Theosophy = any of a number of philosophies maintaining that a knowledge of
    God may be achieved through spiritual ecstasy, direct intuition, or special
    individual relations, especially the movement founded in 1875 as the
    Theosophical Society by Helena Blavatsky and Henry Steel Olcott (1832–1907).
  - defector = a person who has abandoned their country or cause in favor of an
    opposing one.
  - dystopian = relating to or denoting an imagined place or state in which
    everything iis unpleasant or bad, typically a totalitarian or
    environmentally degraded one.
  - kook = crazy person.
  - minuteman = a member of a class of American militiamen who volunteered to be
    ready for service at a minute's  notice.
  - occult = supernatural, mystical, or magical beliefs, practices or phenomena.
  - right wing = the conservative or reactionary section of a political party or
    system.
  - buff = a person who is enthusiastically interested in and very knowledgeable
    about a particular subject.
  - hoaxes = a humorous or malicious deception.
  - spoof = a humorous imitation of something, typically a film or a particular
    genre of film, in which its characteristic feature are exaggerated for comic
    effect.
  - conclave = private meeting.


<br>

# Resources

  - Walker, Jesse. _The United States of Paranoia_. Harper. Kindle Edition.
