---
title: Unit 1 Notes
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-02-10
---

# Unit 1

## Chapter 1: The Art and Science of Economic Analysis

### 1-1 The Economic Problem: Scarce Resources, Unlimited Wants

> The problem is that although your wants or desires are virtually unlimited,
the resources available to satisfy these wants are scares.

**Economics** is the study of how people allocate scarce resources, to satisfy
their unlimited wants.

**Resources** are the materials we have available to produce things with. In
economics, we have four general categories of resources:

  - **Land** - This covers all natural resources. Also includes sunshine, space,
    clean air, and the oceans.
  - **Labor** - This includes not just the work time put into production
    activities but also all that is embodied in that labor. Also referred to as
    _Human Capital_ or the education, experience and training that someone
    brings to their labor.
  - **Physical Capital** - Man made resources and it includes machines, tools,
    office buildings, roads, and factories.
  - **Entrepreneurship** - Refers to that ability to organize the other
    resources and make them productive.

**Scarce** and **Unlimited**, the two words the discipline of economics revolves
around.

A resource is **scarce** when it is not freely available-—that is, when its
price exceeds zero.

> Goods and services that are truly free are not the subject of economics.
Without scarcity, there would be no economic problem and no need for prices

#### 1-1c Economic Decision Makers and Markets

There **four** types of decision makers in the economy. Their interaction
determines how an economy's resources are allocated.

  * **Households**
    - Plays the starring role.
    - As consumers, household demand the goods and services produced. As
      resource demand the goods and services produced. As resource owners,
      households supply labor, capital, natural resources and entrepreneurial
      ability to firms, governments, and the rest of the world.
  * **Firms**
  * **Governments**
  * **The rest of the world**
    - **Firms, governments, and the rest of the world** demand the resources
      that households supply and then use these resources to supply the goods
      and services that households demand.
    - The rest of the world includes foreign households, foreign firms, and
      foreign governments that supply resources and products to U.S. demanders
      and demand resources and products from U.S. suppliers.

Markets are the means by which buyers and sellers carry out exchange at mutually
agreeable terms.

Goods and services are bought and sold in **product markets**. Resources are bought
and sold in **resource markets**.

The **most important** resource market is the **labor, or job, market**. Think about
your own experience looking for a job, and you’ll already have some idea of that
market.

### 1-2 The Art of Economic Analysis

#### 1-2a Rational Self-Interest

In general, **rational self-interest** means that each individual tries to maximize
the expected benefit achieved with a given cost or to minimize the expected
cost of achieving a given benefit. Thus, economists begin with the assumption
that people look out for their self-interest.

For example, a physician who owns a pharmacy prescribes 8 percent more drugs
on average than a physician who does not own a pharmacy.

The notion of self-interest does not rule out concern for others; it simply
means that concern for others is influenced by the same economic forces that
affect other economic choices. _The lower the personal cost of helping others,
the more help we offer_.

#### 1-2c Economic Analysis is Marginal Analysis

  - Economic choice is based on a comparison of the expected marginal benefit
    and the expected marginal cost of the action under consideration.
    **Marginal** means incremental, additional, or extra. Marginal refers to a
    change in an economic variable, a change in the status quo.

**Microeconomics**

  - Is the study of your economic behavior and the economic
    behavior of others who make choices about such matters as how much to study
    and how much to party, how much to borrow and how much to save, what to buy
    and what to sell.
  - Microeconomics examines individual economic choices and how markets
    coordinate the choices of various decision makers.
  - Microeconomics explains how price and quantity are determined in individual
    markets--the market for breakfast cereal, sports equipment, or used cars, for
    instance.

**Macroeconomics**
  - studies the performance of the economy as a whole.

**Economic Fluctuations**
  - Are the rise and fall of economic activity relative to the long-term growth
    trend of the economy

### 1-3 The Science of Economic Analysis

#### 1-3a The Role of Theory

**Economic theory**, or **economic model**, A simplification of reality used to make
predictions about cause and effect in the real world

> A good theory can act like a closet organizer for your mind, helping you
understand a messy and confusing world.

#### 1-3b The Scientific Method

To study economic problems, economists employ a process called the _scientific
method_, which consists of four steps.

##### Step One: Identify the Question and Define Relative Variable

The scientific method begins with curiosity. Ask the question about the
relationship between two relevant variables and how they affect each other.

**Variable**

  - Is a measure that can take on different values at different times

##### Step Two: Specify Assumptions

Specify the assumptions under which the theory is to apply.

One major category of assumptions is the **other-things-constant
assumption**--in Latin, the _ceteris paribus_ assumption.

The idea is to identify the variables of interest and then focus exclusively on
the relationships among them, assuming that nothing else important changes--that
other things remain constant.

We also make assumptions about how people behave; these are called **behavioral
assumptions**. The primary behavioral assumption is _rational self-interest_.

##### Step Three: Formulate a Hypothesis

**Hypothesis**

  - is a theory about how key variables relate to each other
    * For example, one hypothesis holds that if the price of Pepsi goes up,
      other things constant, then the quantity purchased declines.

> The purpose of this hypothesis, like that of any theory, is to help make
predictions about cause and effect in the real world.

##### Step Four: Test the Hypothesis

By comparing its predictions with evidence, we test the validity of a
hypothesis.

To test a hypothesis, we must focus on the variables in question, while
carefully controlling for other effects assumed not to change. The test leads us
to either (1) reject the hypothesis, or theory, if it predicts worse than the
best alternative theory or (2) use the hypothesis, or theory, until a better one
comes along.

#### 1-3c Normative Versus Positive

Economists usually try to explain how the economy works. Sometimes they concern
themselves not with how the economy _does_ work but how it _should_ work.

**Positive Economic Statement**
  - A statement that can be proved or disproved by reference to facts.
  - Concern what is.

**Normative Economic Statement**
  - A statement that reflects an opinion, which cannot be proved or disproved by
    reference to the facts.
  - Concern what, in someone's opinion, should be.

#### 1-3e Predicting Average Behavior

The goal of economic theory is to predict the impact of economic events on
economic choices and, in turn, the effect of these choices on particular markets
or on the economy as a whole.

> The random actions of individuals tend to offset one another, so the average
behavior of a large group can be predicted more accurately than the behavior of
a particular individual.

### 1-4 Some Pitfalls of Faulty Economic Analysis

#### The Fallacy That Association Is Causation

The assumption that the event A caused the event B simply because the two are
associated in time is committing the **association-is-causation fallacy**, a
common error.

The fact that one event precedes another or that the two events occur
simultaneously does not necessarily mean that one causes the other.

#### The Fallacy of Composition

An erroneous belief that what is true for the individual, or the part, is also
true for the group, or the whole.

An assumption to which one infers true of the whole from the fact that it is
true of some part of the whole.

#### The Mistake of Ignoring the Secondary Effects

The mistake is to ignore the secondary effects, or the unintended consequences
of an action or a decision.

Economic actions have secondary effects that often turn out to be more important
than the primary effects. Secondary effects may develop more slowly and may not
be immediately obvious, but good economic analysis tries to anticipate them
and take them into account.

### If Economists Are So Smart, Why Aren't They Rich?

The economics profession thrives because its models usually do a better job of
making economic sense out of a confusing world than do alternative approaches.
But not all economists are wealthy, nor is personal wealth the goal of the
discipline. In a similar vein, not all doctors are healthy (some even smoke),
not all carpenters live in perfectly built homes, not all marriage counselors
are happily married, and not all child psychologists have well- adjusted
children. Still, those who study economics do reap financial rewards.

## Chapter 2: Economic Tools and Economic System

### 2-4 Economic Systems

#### 2-4b Pure Capitalism

Under **pure capitalism**, there is no government. The rules of the game include the
private ownership of resources and the market distribution of products.
  - Owners have **property rights** to the **use of their resources** and are
  therefore free to supply those resources to the **highest bidder**.

**Private property rights**

  - allow individual owners to use resources or to charge others for their use

**Consumers are free to buy whatever goods they can afford**. All this voluntary
buying and selling is coordinated by unrestricted markets, where buyers and
sellers make their intentions known.

Under pure capitalism, markets answer the what, how, and for whom questions.
That's why capitalism is also referred to as a market system.

##### Flaws of Pure Capitalism

1. No central authority protects property rights, enforces contracts, and
   otherwise ensures that the rules of the game are followed.
2. People with no resources to sell could starve. 3. Some producers may try to
   monopolize markets by eliminating the competition.
4. The production or consumption of some goods involves side effects that can
   harm or benefit people not involved in the market transaction.
5. Firms have no incentive to produce the so-called public goods, such as
   national defense, because private firms cannot prevent non-payers from
   enjoying the benefits of public goods.
6. Market economies experience economic fluctuations, which are alternating
   periods of expansions and recessions in their level of economic activity,
   especially in employment and production.

#### 2-4c Pure Command System

In a **pure command system**, resources are directed and production is
coordinated not by market forces but by the “command,” or central plan, of
government.

##### Flaws of Pure Command System

1. Running an economy is so complicated and requires so much information that
   some resources are used inefficiently.
2. Because nobody in particular owns resources, each person has less incentive
   to employ them in their highest-valued use, so some resources are wasted.
3. Central plans may be more reflective of the preferences of central planners,
   who in many cases are unelected dictators, than the preferences of society.
4. Because government is responsible for all production, the variety of products
   tends to be more limited than in a capitalist economy.
5. Each individual has less personal freedom in making economic choices.
6. Because profit has no place in a command economy, people have less incentive
   to invent new and better products or find more efficient ways to make
   existing products.

## What is Economy?

**Economy** is that sphere of social activity involved in the _production,
distribution and consumption_ of material goods and services.
### The Three Functions of an Economic System

All economic activities answer one or more of the following questions that must
be addressed by an economic system.

1. **What to Produce?**
2. **How to Produce it?**
3. **How to Distribute the Output?**

### Types of Economic System

1. **Traditional Economies**
  - Characterized by **subsistence**. Individuals produce for themselves most of
    the things that they consume and if they need something they cannot make
    they will barter for it.  The three economic functions are answered by
    current needs and traditions.

2. **Feudal Economies**
  - are organized around **land ownership**. Workers are attached to the land
    where they are born. If land is transferred, they stay with the land.  Most
    of the important economic decisions are made by the landowners.

3. **Slave Economies**
  - In slave economies, labor is viewed as property. Those who own the slaves
    make the important economic decisions.

4. **Market or Capitalist Economies**
  - Market economies have _three_ main characteristics; wage labor, private
    ownership of the means of production and exchange is done through markets.
  - Markets are **coordinated by price and decisions are decentralized**, that
    is each individual makes his own economic decisions.

5. **Socialist Economies or Command Economies**
  - Characterized by **public ownership** of the means of production and central
    planning. These economies have a planning bureau that makes the important
    economic decisions.

### How do Markets Perform the Three Functions of an Economic System?

In *Market Economies** the question,

1. **What to Produce?**
  - is answered by what **consumers demand**.  In market economies producers
    are motivated to produce what buyers want, so that is what they produce.

2. **How to Produce it?**
  - is answered by **producers seeking the most cost efficient method to
    produce the output**. Producers want to stay in business, so they look to
    provide the consumer with what he wants at the lowest cost.

3. **How to Distribute the output?**
  - is answered by the **willingness and ability of consumers to demand the
    output**. In order to have a demand for something a consumer has to both
    want it and be able to pay for it.  If a consumer doesn't demand a good it
    will not get produced.  This goes back to that first economic function,
    What to produce?.  Markets will only produce what consumers demand, so if
    someone is too poor to demand something it doesn't get produced.

This brings us to one of the most important characteristics of markets; Markets
are very **EFFICIENT** but they are _not_ necessarily **EQUITABLE** in the distribution of
the output.

Market economies are very efficient. Producers are motivated to produce what
consumers want so there aren't a lot of shortages or surpluses of goods.
Producers are also motivated to find the most cost efficient methods to produce
those goods. Resources don't get wasted.

However the distribution of the output is dependent on the distribution of
income which in many cases is dependent on chance.  The result is that the
distribution of the output could end up to be highly inequitable. This was one
of Marx's main criticisms of capitalism and why communism was favored in some
countries.

On the other hand Markets are preferred by many despite this shortcoming because
they consider markets with its decentralized decision making as freer and more
supportive of democratic institutions.

<br>

# References

Textbook

  * [ECON Macro 6th Edition](https://ereader.chegg.com/#/books/9781337671804/cfi/3!/4/2@100:0.00) -- eTextbook
    - Part 1: The Art and Science of Economic Analysis Economic Systems

Files

  * [What is Economics and Notes on Graphing](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-120/unit-1/What is Economics and Notes on Graphing2.pdf)
  * [What is an Economy](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-120/unit-1/What is an economy.100s06-1.pdf)
  * [What is Rationality](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-120/unit-1/What is Rationality.pdf)

Session Notes

  * [Notes 1](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-120/unit-1/U1.1.28.M.png)
  * [Notes 2](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-120/unit-1/6.20Notes1.png)
  * [Notes 3](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-120/unit-1/6.20Notes2.png)

