---
title: Chapter 3
subtitle: Exchange and Markets
author: Mark Lucernas
date: Sep 09, 2020
---


# Chapter 3: Exchange and Markets

## 3.1 Comparative Advantage and Exchange

### 3.1.2 Specialization and the Gains from Trade

We can explain how people can benefit from specialization and trade with a
simple example of two people and two products. Suppose that the crew of the
television show Survivor finishes filming a season of episodes on a remote
tropical island and, when the crew returns to the mainland, two people miss the
boat and are left behind. The two real survivors, Fred and Kate, produce and
consume two goods, coconuts and fish. The first row of Table 3.1 shows their
production possibilities. Each day Fred can either gather two coconuts or catch
six fish, while Kate can either gather one coconut or catch one fish.

> **Table 3.1** Productivity and Opportunity Costs

<center>

|                     | Fred     |             | Kate     |           |
|---------------------|----------|-------------|----------|-----------|
|                     | Coconuts | Fish        | Coconuts | Fish      |
| Output per day      | 2        | 6           | 1        | 1         |
| Opportunity cost    | 3 fish   | 1/3 coconut | 1 fish   | 1 coconut |

</center>

> [ðŸ“‘ Principle of Opportunity Cost](../../../spring-2020/ECON-121/notes/ch-2#the-principle-of-opportunity-cost)

Fred's opportunity cost of one coconut is three fish--that's how many fish he
could catch in the time required to gather one coconut. Similarly, his
opportunity cost of a fish is one-third coconut, the number of coconuts he could
gather in the time required to catch one fish. For Kate, the opportunity cost of
one coconut is one fish, and the opportunity cost of one fish is one coconut.

To demonstrate the benefits of exchange, letâ€™s imagine that both people are
initially self-sufficient, with each producing enough of both goods to satisfy
their own desires.

![Figure 3.1](../../../../files/fall-2020/ECON-120/chapter-3/figure-3.1.png)

Specialization will increase the total output of our little survivor economy. It
is sensible for each person to specialize in the good for which he or she has a
lower opportunity cost.

<a name="comparative-advantage-term">**Comparative advantage**</a> - The ability
of one person or nation to produce a good at a lower opportunity cost than
another person or nation.

- Fred has a comparative advantage in producing fish because his opportunity
  cost of fish is one-third coconut per fish, compared to one coconut per fish
  for Kate.
- Kate has a comparative advantage in harvesting coconuts because her
  opportunity cost of coconuts is one fish per coconut, compared to three fish
  per coconut for Fred.

> [ðŸ“‘ Principle of Voluntary Exchange](../../../spring-2020/ECON-121/notes/ch-2#the-principle-of-voluntary-exchange)

### 3.1.2 Comparative Advantage versus Absolute Advantage

Weâ€™ve seen that it is beneficial for each person to specialize in the product
for which he or she has a comparative advantageâ€”a lower opportunity cost. You
may have noticed that Fred is more productive than Kate in producing both goods.
Fred requires a smaller quantity of resources (in this case less labor time) to
produce both goods, so he has an absolute advantage in producing both goods.
Despite his absolute advantage, Fred gains from specialization and trade because
he has a comparative advantage in fish. Fred is twice as productive as Kate in
producing coconuts, but six times as productive in producing fish. By relying on
Kate to produce coconuts, Fred frees up time to spend producing fish, the good
for which he has the larger productivity advantage over Kate. The lesson is that
specialization and exchange result from comparative advantage, not absolute
advantage.

<a name="absolute-advantage-term">**Absolute advantage**</a> - The ability of
one person or nation to produce a product at a lower resource cost than another
person or nation

### The Division of Labor and Exchange

In his 1776 book An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,
Adam Smith noted that specialization actually increased productivity through the
division of labor. He used the example of the pin factory to illustrate how the
division of labor increased output:

> A workman ... could scarce, perhaps with his utmost industry, make one pin a
day, and certainly could not make twenty. But the way in which this business is
now carried on... one man draws out the wire, another straightens it, a third
cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds the top for receiving the head; to
make the head requires two or three distinct operations... . The... making of a
pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations... . I
have seen a small manufactory of this kind where 10 men... make among them...
upward of forty eight thousand pins in a day.

Smith listed three reasons for productivity to increase with specialization,
with each worker performing a single production task:

1. **Repetition**. The more times a worker performs a particular task, the more
   proficient the worker becomes at that task.
2. **Continuity**. A specialized worker doesnâ€™t spend time switching from one
   task to another. This is especially important if switching tasks requires a
   change in tools or location.
3. **Innovation**. A specialized worker gains insights into a particular task
   that lead to better production.

> A great part of the machines made use of in those manufacturies in which
labour is most subdivided, were originally the inventions of common workmen,
who, being each of them employed in some simple operation, naturally turned
their thoughts toward finding out easier and readier methods of performing it

### 3.1.4 Comparative Advantage and International Trade

The lessons of comparative advantage and specialization apply to trade between
nations. Each nation could be self-sufficient, producing all the goods it
consumes, or it could specialize in products for which it has a comparative
advantage. Even if one nation is more productive than a second nation in
producing all goods, trade will be beneficial if the first nation has a bigger
productivity advantage in one product--that is, if one nation has a comparative
advantage in some product.

<a name="import-term">**Import**</a> - A good or service produced in a foreign
country purchased by residents of the home country.
<a name="export-term">**Export**</a> - A good or service produced in the home
country and sold in another country.

Many people are skeptical about the idea that international trade can make
everyone better off. President Abraham Lincoln expressed his discomfort with
importing goods:

> I know if I buy a coat in America, I have a coat and America has the money--If
I buy a coat in England, I have the coat and England has the money.

What President Lincoln didn't understand is that when he buys a coat in England,
he sends dollars to England, but the dollars don't just sit there. Eventually
they are sent back to the United States to buy goods produced by U.S. workers.
In the words of economist Todd Buchholz, the author of _New Ideas from Dead
Economists_,

> Money may not make the world go round, but money certainly goes around the
world. To stop it prevents goods from traveling from where they are produced
most inexpensively to where they are desired most deeply.

### Outsourcing

When a domestic firm shifts part of its production to a different country, we
say the firm is _outsourcing_ or _offshoring_. In the modern global economy,
transportation and communication costs are relatively low, so firms can spread
production across many countries. By taking advantage of the comparative
advantages of different countries, a firm can produce its product at a lower
cost, charge a lower price, and sell more output.

Firms shift functions such as customer service, telemarketing, document
management, and medical transcription overseas to reduce production costs,
allowing them to sell their products at lower prices. Some recent studies of
outsourcing have reached a number of conclusions:

1. The loss of domestic jobs resulting from outsourcing is a normal part of a
   healthy economy because technology and consumer preferences change over time.
   The number of jobs lost to outsourcing is a small fraction of the normal job
   loss experienced by a healthy economy. For example, in the first 3 months of
   2004, a total of 239,361 workers were laid off, with 9,985 jobs moving to
   another location within the United States, 4,633 outsourced to another
   country, and the rest simply lost to the economy. This means that roughly 2
   percent of reported layoffs were caused by outsourcing.
2. The jobs lost to outsourcing are at least partly offset by jobs gained
   through insourcing, jobs that are shifted from overseas to the United States.
3. The cost savings from outsourcing are substantial, leading to lower prices
   for consumers and more output for firms. The jobs gained from increased
   output at least partly offset the jobs lost to outsourcing.

## 3.2 Markets


<a name="market-economy-term">**Market economy**</a> - An economy in which
people specialize and exchange goods and services in markets.


Although it appears that markets arose naturally, a number of social and
government inventions have made them work better:

1. Contracts specify the terms of exchange, facilitating exchange between
   strangers. If you have a cell phone provider, you expect to have reliable
   phone service as long as you pay your bill. If you operate a bookstore, you
   expect book wholesalers to deliver the books youâ€™ve purchased. In both cases,
   a contract specifies the terms of exchange.
2. Insurance reduces the risk entrepreneurs face. If you operate a bagel shop,
   fire insurance reduces your losses in the event of a fire.
3. Patents increase the profitability of inventions, encouraging firms to
   develop new products and production processes. Pharmaceutical companies such
   as Bayer Pharmaceutical and Merck spend billions of dollars to create, test,
   and bring new products to the market. A patent prevents other companies from
   copying a new product, making it more likely that the revenue from a new
   product will be large enough to cover research and development costs.
4. Accounting rules provide potential investors with reliable information about
   the financial performance of a firm. If you are thinking about investing in
   Apple Inc., you can use publicly available information to examine the
   companyâ€™s financial history.

### 3.2.1 Virtues of Markets

<a name="centrally-planned-economy-term">**Centrally planned economy**</a> - An
economy in which a government bureaucracy decides how much of each good to
produce, how to produce the good, and who gets the good.


In a market system, prices provide individuals the information they need to make
decisions.

Prices provide signals about the relative scarcity of a product and help an
economy respond to scarcity. For example, suppose wool becomes scarcer, either
because a new use for wool is discovered or an old source of wool disappears.
The greater scarcity will increase the price of wool, and producers and
consumers will respond in ways that diminish scarcity:

- The higher price encourages fabric producers to use the available wool more
  efficiently and encourages farmers to produce more of it.
- The higher price also encourages consumers to switch to coats made from
  alternative fabrics.

These two responses help the economy accommodate an increase in scarcity.
Consumers and producers don't need to know why wool is scarcer for these
mechanisms to kick in--they only need to know that the price is higher.

The decisions made in markets result from the interactions of millions of
people, each motivated by his or her own interest. Adam Smith used the metaphor
of the "invisible hand" to explain that people acting in self-interest may
actually promote the interest of society as a whole:

> It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that
we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address
ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them
of our own necessities but of their advantages... . [Man is] led by an invisible
hand to promote an end which was no part of this intention... . By pursuing his
own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than
when he really intends to promote it... . Nobody but a beggar chooses to depend
chiefly upon the benevolence of his fellow citizens.

**The market system works by getting each person, motivated by self-interest, to
produce products for other people.**

### 3.2.2 The Role of Entrepreneurs

Entrepreneurs play a key role in a market economy. Prices and profits provide
signals to entrepreneurs about what to produce. If a product suddenly becomes
popular, competition among consumers to obtain it will increase its price and
increase the profits earned by firms producing it. Entrepreneurs will enter the
market and increase production to meet the higher demand, switching resources
from the production of other products. As entrepreneurs enter the market, they
compete for customers, driving the price back down to the level that generates
just enough profit for them to remain in business. In contrast, if a product
becomes less popular, the process is reversed. Producers will cut prices in
order to be sure of selling the product to the smaller number of customers who
want it. Entrepreneurs will leave the unprofitable market, finding other
products to produce, and the price will eventually rise back to the level where
profits are high enough for the remaining producers to justify staying in
business.

### 3.3.3 Example of the Emergence of Markets: POW camps

To illustrate the pervasiveness of exchange, consider the emergence of markets
in prisoner of war (POW) camps during World War II.9 During World War II, the
International Red Cross gave each Allied prisoner a weekly parcel with the same
mix of products--tinned milk, jam, butter, biscuits, corned beef, chocolate,
sugar, and cigarettes. In addition, many prisoners received private parcels from
family and friends. The prisoners used barter to exchange one good for another,
and cigarettes emerged as the medium of exchange. Prisoners wandered through the
camp calling out their offers of goods. For example, "cheese for seven" meant
that the prisoner was willing to sell a cheese ration for seven cigarettes. In
addition to food, the prisoners bought and sold clothing (80 cigarettes per
shirt), laundry services (two cigarettes per garment), and hot cups of coffee
(two cigarettes per cup).

The prices of products reflected their scarcity. The tea-drinking British
prisoners demanded little coffee. Because the British were confined to their
compound, packets of coffee beans sold for just a few cigarettes. Enterprising
British prisoners bribed prison guards to permit them to travel to the French
compound, where they could sell coffee for dozens of cigarettes. Religious
groups such as the Sikhs didn't eat beef, and the excess supply of beef in the
Sikh compound led to low beef prices. One prisoner who knew the Sikh language
bought beef at a low price in the Sikh compound and sold it at a higher price in
other compounds. Eventually, other people entered the Sikh beef trade, and beef
prices across compounds became roughly equal.

## 3.3 Market Failure and the Role of Government

Although markets often operate efficiently on their own, sometimes they do not.
_Market failure_ happens when a market doesn't generate the most efficient
outcome.

Preview topics of market failures:

- Pollution. For markets to work efficiently, the people making the decisions
  about production and consumption must bear the full costs of their decisions.
  In some cases, however, other people bear some of the costs. For example,
  people living downwind from a paper mill breathe dirty air. The people who
  decide how much paper to produce will ignore these other costs, so their
  decisions about how much paper to produce will be inefficient from the social
  perspective. Similarly, people with asthma suffer from the emissions of cars
  and SUVs. Drivers ignore these other costs, so their decisions about how much
  to drive will be inefficient from the social perspective. The role of
  government is to ensure that polluters bear the full cost of their production
  and consumption decisions.
- Public goods. A public good is available for everyone to utilize, regardless
  of who pays and who doesnâ€™t. Another requirement for market efficiency is that
  decision makers must reap the full benefits from their decisions. In the case
  of a public good such as a levee, the benefits go to everyone in the area
  protected from flooding, not just the person who builds the levee. The role of
  government is to facilitate the collective decision making for public goods
  such as levees, national defense, parks, and space exploration.
- Imperfect information. For markets to operate efficiently, people must have
  enough information to make informed decisions about how much to produce or
  consume. When they donâ€™t, the role of government is to disseminate information
  and promote informed choices.
- Imperfect competition. Some markets are dominated by a few large firms, and
  the lack of competition leads to high prices and small quantities. For
  example, DeBeers dominates the diamond market. The role of government is to
  foster competition, which leads to lower prices and more choices.


What are the other roles of government in a market-based economy? The government
enforces property rights by protecting the property and possessions of
individuals and firms from theft. The government uses the legal system--police,
courts, and prisons--to enforce those rights. The protection of private property
guarantees that people will keep the fruits of their labor, encouraging
production and exchange. The government has two additional roles to play in a
market economy:

- Establishing rules for market exchange and using its police power to enforce
  the rules.
- Reducing economic uncertainty and providing for people who have lost a job,
  have poor health, or experience other unforeseen difficulties and accidents.

### 3.3.1 Government Enforces the Rules of Exchange

The market system is based on exchanges between strangers. These exchanges are
covered by implicit and explicit contracts that establish the terms of trade.
For example, real-estate transactions and other business dealings are sealed
with explicit contracts that specify who pays what and when. To facilitate
exchange, the government helps to enforce contracts by maintaining a legal
system that punishes people who violate them. This system allows people to trade
with the confidence that the terms of the contracts they enter will be met.

In the case of consumer goods, the implicit contract is that the product is safe
to use. The government enforces this implicit contract through product liability
or **tort law**. If a consumer is harmed by using a particular product, the consumer
can file a lawsuit against the manufacturer and seek compensation.

The government also disseminates information about consumer products. The
government requires firms to provide information about the features of their
products, including warnings about potentially harmful uses of the product. For
example, cigarettes have warning labels like "Quitting Smoking Now Greatly
Reduces Serious Risks to Your Health." Some cold medications warn consumers to
avoid driving while taking the medication.

### 3.3.2 Government Can Reduce Economic Uncertainty

A market economy provides plenty of opportunities to people, but it has risks.
Your level of success in a market economy--how much income you earn and how much
wealth you accumulate--will depend on your innate intelligence as well as your
efforts. But there is also an element of luck: Your fate is affected by where
you were born, what occupation you choose, and your genetic makeup and health.
Chance events, such as natural disasters and human accidents, also can affect
your prosperity. Finally, some people lose their jobs when the national economy
is in a slump and firms lay off workers. Given the uncertainty of market
economies, most governments fund a "social safety net" that provides for
citizens who fare poorly in markets. The safety net includes programs that
redistribute income from rich to poor, from the employed to the unemployed. The
idea behind having a social safety net is to guarantee a minimum income to
people who suffer from job losses, poor health, or bad luck.

Of course, there are private responses to economic uncertainty. For example, we
can buy our own insurance to cover losses from fire and theft, to cover our
medical expenses, and to provide death benefits to our survivors in the event of
an accident or disaster. Private insurance works because only a fraction of the
people who buy insurance eventually file claims and receive reimbursements from
insurance companies. In other words, the payments, or premiums, of many are used
to pay the claims of a few. Private insurance works when enough low-risk people
purchase insurance to cover the costs of reimbursing the high-risk people.

Some types of insurance are unavailable in the private insurance market. As a
result, the government steps in to fill the void. For example, unemployment
insurance (UI) is a government program that provides 26 weeks of compensation
for people who lose their jobs. The insurance is financed by mandatory
contributions from employers. Because all employers contribute to the system,
the cost of the insurance stays low.

## Chapter Summary


1. It is sensible for a person to produce the product for which he or she has a
   [comparative advantage](#comparative-advantage-term), that is, a lower
   opportunity cost than another person.
2. _Specialization_ increases productivity through the division of labor, a
   result of the benefits of repetition, continuity, and innovation.
3. A system of international specialization and trade is sensible because
   nations have different opportunity costs of producing goods, giving rise to
   comparative advantages.
4. Under a [market system](#market-system-term), self-interested people,
   guided by prices, make the decisions about what products to produce, how to
   produce them, and who gets them.
5. Government roles in a market economy include establishing the rules for
   exchange, reducing economic uncertainty, and responding to market failures.

<br>

# Resources

- [ðŸ“‘ Principle of Opportunity Cost](../../../spring-2020/ECON-121/notes/ch-2#the-principle-of-opportunity-cost)
- [ðŸ“‘ Principle of Voluntary Exchange](../../../spring-2020/ECON-121/notes/ch-2#the-principle-of-voluntary-exchange)

Textbook

- Macroeconomics: Principles/Applications/Tools, 10e by Arthur O'Sullivan,
  Steven Sheffrin, Stepehn Perez

