---
title: Unit 1 Notes
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-02-10
tags: unit-1, notes, u-1
---

# Contents
  - [Unit 1](#Unit 1)
    - [Part 1: The Art and Science of Economic Analysis](#Unit 1#Part 1: The Art and Science of Economic Analysis)
      - [1-1 The Economic Problem: Scarce Resources, Unlimited Wants](#Unit 1#Part 1: The Art and Science of Economic Analysis#1-1 The Economic Problem: Scarce Resources, Unlimited Wants)
    - [What is Economy?](#Unit 1#What is Economy?)

# Unit 1

## Part 1: The Art and Science of Economic Analysis

### 1-1 The Economic Problem: Scarce Resources, Unlimited Wants

> The problem is that although your wants, or desires, are virtually unlimited,
the resources available to satisfy these wants are scares.

**Economics** is the study of how people allocate scarce resources, to satisfy
their unlimited wants.

**Resources** are the materials we have available to produce things with. In
economics, we have four general categories of resources:

  - **Land** - This covers all natural resources. Also includes sunshine, space,
    clean air, and the oceans.
  - **Labor** - This includes not just the work time put into production
    activities but also all that is embodied in that labor. Also referred to as
    _Human Capital_ or the education, experience and training that someone
    brings to their labor.
  - **Physical Capital** - Man made resources and it includes machines, tools,
    office buildings, roads, and factories.
  - **Entrepreneurship** - Refers to that ability to organize the other
    resources and make them productive.

**Scarce** and **Unlimited**, the two words the discipline of economics revolves
around.

## What is Economy?

**Economy** is that sphere of social activity involved in the _production,
distribution and consumption_ of material goods and services.
