---
title: ECON 121 Chapter 15 Notes
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-05-17
summary: Public Goods and Public Choices
---


# Chapter 15: Public Goods and Public Choice

![Figure 15.1 Spending Programs for Local, State, and Federal Governments](../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-15/ch-15_figure-15.1.png)

![Figure 15.2 Revenue Sources for Local, State, and Federal Government](../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-15/ch-15_figure-15.2.png)

## 15.1 External Benefits and Public Goods

As we saw earlier in the chapter on market efficiency, when there are neither
external benefits nor external costs, the market equilibrium is efficient. When
a government intervenes in an efficient market, the result is inefficiency. In
this chapter, we see that a market with external benefits is inefficient, so
there is an opportunity for government to promote efficiency.

For most goods, the benefits of consumption are confined to the person who buys
the good. The benefit experienced by a buyer is called a _private benefit_. In
contrast, when someone else benefits from a good, the good generates an external
benefit.

<a name="external-benefits-term">**External benefits**</a>

  - A benefit from a good experienced by someone other than the person who buys
    the good.


To illustrate the idea of external benefits and inefficiency, consider a dam
built for flood-control purposes. One thousand people would be protected by the
dam, and each person would get a $50 benefit. **If one person builds a dam, the
private benefit is $50 and the external benefit is $49,950, or $50 for each of
the 999 other people who benefit.** If the cost of building the dam is $20,000,
**no single person will build it because the cost exceeds the $50 private
benefit.** In other words, if we rely on the forces of supply and demand, with
each person considering only the private benefits and costs of the dam, it won’t
be built.

**When there are external benefits from a good, collective decision making
generates more efficient choices.** In the case of the dam, the total benefit of
$50,000 exceeds the $20,000 cost, so the dam is efficient and society as a whole
will be better off if it is built. **The government can solve this problem by
collecting enough tax revenue to pay for the dam.** Suppose the government
proposes to collect $20 per person to pay for the dam. The tax raises $20,000 in
tax revenue ($20 per person times 1,000 people), which is just high enough to
pay the $20,000 cost of the dam. Most people will support this proposal because
the $20 tax per person is less than the $50 benefit per person. **The government
can use its taxing power to provide a good that would otherwise not be
provided.**

### 15.1.1 Public Goods and the Free-Rider Problem

<a name="public-good-term">**Public good**</a>

  - A good that is available for everyone to consume, regardless of who pays and
    who doesn't
  - A good that is _nonrival_ in consumption: The fact that one person benefits
    from a good does not prevent another person from benefiting.
  - A good that is _nonexcludable_: It is impractical to exclude people who
    don't pay.
  - Some examples of public goods are national defense, law enforcement, space
    exploration, the preservation of endangered species, the protection of the
    earth’s ozone layer, and fireworks shows.


<a name="private-good-term">**Private good**</a>

  - A good that is consumed by a single person or household
  - A good that is _rival_ in consumption and _excludable_.
  - For example, only one person can eat a hot dog, so it is a private good.


_Most public goods are supported by taxes_. What would happen if we eliminated
taxes and asked people to contribute money to pay for national defense, dams,
city streets, and the police? Would people contribute enough money to support
these programs at the efficient level? The problem with using voluntary
contributions to support public goods is known as the _free-rider problem_.

<a name="free-rider-term">**Free rider**</a>

  - A person who gets the benefit from a good but does not pay for it.


The flip side of the free--rider problem is the chump problem: No one wants to
be the chump--the person who gives free rides to other people—so no one
contributes any money.

### 15.1.2 Behavioral Economics and Free Riding

People are willing to cooperate by contributing in the social interest as long
as other people cooperate, too.

The conclusion from the contribution experiment is that most people are willing
to cooperate, but no one wants to be a chump. We can define a chump as a person
who is systematically exploited by others.

Once a contributor realizes that he or she is playing the chump to free riders,
the response is to contribute less or nothing. **Over the course of the game, the
recognition of chump status spreads to more and more contributors, so the
average contribution decreases to zero.**

### 15.1.3 Overcoming the Free-Rider Problem

Many organizations, including public radio and television, religious
organizations, and charitable organizations, raise money through voluntary
contributions. The successful organizations use a number of techniques to
encourage people to contribute:

  - _Giving contributors private goods such as coffee mugs, books, musical
    recordings, and magazine subscriptions_. People are more likely to
    contribute if they get something for it.
  - _Arranging matching contributions_. You are more likely to contribute if you
    know your $30 contribution will be matched with a contribution from another
    person or your employer.
  - _Appealing to a person’s sense of civic or moral responsibility_. People are
    more likely to contribute when they are reminded that they benefit from the
    service.


## 15.2 Private Goods and External Benefits

In contrast to a public good, a private good can be utilized by only a single
person or household. However, some private goods generate benefits for people
who do not directly consume the good. For example, suppose I replace the peeling
paint on my house with a fresh coat of paint. I benefit from the new paint
because it protects my house from decay and my house will look better. My
neighbors will also benefit from the improved appearance of the neighborhood.
Similarly, if I buy a fire extinguisher and install fireproof roofing, my
neighbors benefit because a fire is less likely to spread to their houses.

### 15.2.1 External Benefits from Education

Education generates three kinds of external benefits:

  1. _Workplace externalities_. In most workplaces, people work in groups and
     teamwork is important. A well-educated person understands instructions
     readily and is more likely to suggest ways to improve the production
     process. As a result, when a well-educated person joins a work team, the
     productivity of everyone on the team increases. Higher productivity
     generally leads to higher profits for firms, and members of the team are
     likely to earn higher salaries.
  2. _Civic externalities_. Citizens in a democratic society make collective
     decisions by voting in elections, and each citizen must live with these
     decisions. A well-educated person is more likely to vote intelligently, so
     there are external benefits for other citizens.
  3. _Crime externalities_. Educated people earn higher legal incomes and thus
     commit less crime. High school dropouts have relatively low wages and high
     crime rates, so increasing the high school graduation rate generates large
     reductions in crime.


### 15.2.2 External Benefits and the Marginal Principle

In Figure 15.3, the marginal private benefit curve shows the extra benefit to
the child from each additional book, measured as the increase in future income.
Assume the marginal cost of books is constant at $8 per book. Applying the
marginal principle, the parent will choose point $a$, where the marginal benefit
equals the marginal cost, and buy nine books.

![Figure 15.3 External Benefits and the Marginal Principle](../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-15/ch-15_figure-15.3.png)

> Education (represented here as the number of books read) generates external
benefits, so the marginal social benefit exceeds the marginal private benefit.
Using books as an example of education, an individual picks point a, where the
marginal private benefit equals the marginal cost. Point b is the socially
efficient point, where the marginal social benefit equals the marginal cost.

The social benefit exceeds the $8 cost, so providing the book is efficient from
the social perspective. The private benefit of $6 is less than the $8 cost,
however, so the parent won’t buy the 12th book, but instead will stop with nine
books. **The lesson is that when there are external benefits, decisions based on
private benefits will generate an inefficiently small quantity of the good.**

**Because of the external benefits from education, the government uses various
policies to encourage people to become educated.** Local governments provide
free education through high school. States subsidize students at public colleges
and universities, providing college education at a fraction of its actual cost.
In addition, the federal government provides financial aid to students in both
public and private schools.

### Other Private Goods That Generate External Benefits

The government subsidizes other goods that generate external benefits. Subsidies
for on-the-job training and education encourage workers and firms to invest in
human capital and increase labor productivity. It is sensible for the government
to subsidize training and education because some of the benefits are transferred
to other firms when workers change employers. Another example of external
benefits is research at universities and other nonprofit organizations. If a
research project provides knowledge or technology that leads to the development
of new products or the improvement of old ones, the benefits from the project
spill over onto consumers and producers. When there are external benefits, the
government can encourage people to take actions that benefit other people. By
making beneficial transactions happen, the government can increase efficiency.


## 15.3 Public Choice and the Median Voter

<a name="public-choice-economics-term">**Public-choice economics**</a>

  - A filed of economics that uses models of rational choice to explore decision
    making in the public sector.


### 15.3.1 Voting and the Median-Voter Rule

<a name="median-voter-rule-term">**Median-voter rule**</a>

  - The choices made by the government will match the preferences of the median
    voter.



To see the logic of the median-voter rule, consider a state where there are two
candidates for governor—Penny and Buck—and the only issue in the election is how
much the state should spend on education. Each citizen will vote for the
candidate whose proposed education budget is closest to the citizen’s preferred
budget. Figure 15.4 shows citizens’ preferences for education spending, with
different preferred budgets on the horizontal axis and the number of voters on
the vertical axis. For example, two citizens have a preferred budget of $1
billion, four have a preferred budget of $2 billion, and so on. The median
budget, which splits the rest of the voters into two equal groups (20 voters on
each side), is $5 billion.

![Figure 15.4 The Median-Voter Rule](../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-15/ch-15_figure-15.4.png)

> If Penny proposes a $3 billion budget and Buck proposes a $7 billion budget,
the election will result in a tie. By moving toward the median budget, Penny can
increase her chance of being elected. In equilibrium, both candidates will
propose a budget close to the $5 billion preferred budget of the median voter.

Suppose the two candidates start out with very different proposed education
budgets. Penny proposes a budget of $3 billion, and Buck proposes $7 billion.
The 20 citizens with preferred budgets less than or equal to $4 billion will
vote for Penny because her proposed budget is closest to their preferred
budgets. Buck’s supporters include the 20 citizens with preferred budgets
greater than or equal to $6 billion. The two candidates will split the 10 voters
with a preferred budget of $5 billion (halfway between the two proposed
budgets), so each candidate will get a total of 25 votes, resulting in a tie.

Penny could increase her chance of being elected by increasing her proposed
budget. Let’s say she proposes $4 billion instead of $3 billion. All the voters
with a preferred budget of $5 billion will vote for Penny because Penny’s $4
billion proposal is now closer to their $5 billion preferred budget than Buck’s
$7 billion proposal. Penny won’t lose any of her other votes either, so she will
win the election by a vote of 30 (equal to $2 + 4 + 6 + 8 + 10$) to 20 (equals
$8 + 8 + 4$).  If Buck is smart, he will realize that he could get more votes by
moving toward the median budget. For example, if he decreases his proposed
budget to $6 billion, the election would result in a tie vote again. Penny and
Buck will continue to move their proposed budgets toward the median budget ($5
billion) until they both propose budgets that are very close to the median
budget.

Powerful forces pull the two candidates toward the preferences of the median
voter. **As long as Penny proposes a smaller budget than Buck, the people with
small preferred budgets will continue to vote for her. The benefit of moving
toward the median is that she can take some votes from Buck. Similarly, Buck
doesn’t have to worry about people with large preferred budgets but can
concentrate instead on the battle for voters in the middle.** The result is that
by election day the two candidates have adopted virtually the same position: The
position of the median voter. Voters trying to choose between two candidates may
feel they don’t have much choice. In fact, **the median-voter rule says the
choices made by government will match the preferences of the median voter,
regardless of who wins the election.**

### 15.3.2 Voting with Feet

Although we usually think that people make political decisions by voting in
elections, it is also possible to "vote with your feet." In 1956 economist
Charles M. Tiebout suggested that a household’s choice of which community to
live in is based in part on the tax and spending policies of different
communities. **Households express their preferences by moving to communities
that offer the best package of services and taxes. A community with inefficient
public services will experience a loss in population, perhaps causing the local
officials to make public services more efficient to attract new residents.**

### 15.3.3 The Median Voter and the Median Location


![Figure 15.5 Competition on a Beach Leads to a Median Location for Both Sellers](../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-15/ch-15_figure-15.5.png)

> (A) If one seller starts at the 1/4-mile mark and the other starts at the
3/4-mile mark, each has a territory of 1/2 mile and sells 60 cones. (B) If Lefty
moves to the median location, his territory increases to the 5/8 mile mark, and
he sells 75 cones, compared to 45 for Righty. (C) Righty can recover her lost
territory by moving to the median location. In equilibrium, both sellers locate
at the median location and each has half the market.

The outcome of the ice cream vendors’ game is the same as for the politicians’
game. Like politicians, the vendors have an incentive to move to the median
location, so there is no real difference between the two vendors.

### 15.3.4 Alternative Models of Government: Self-Interest and Special Interest

The _self-interest_ theory of government explains why voters sometimes approve
explicit limits on taxes and government spending. For example, many states have
limits on property tax rates and total revenue, and many states also limit total
government spending. According to the self-interest theory of government,
limitations on taxes and spending are necessary safeguards against politicians
and bureaucrats who benefit from larger budgets.

Another model of government is based on the idea that small groups of people
manipulate government for their own gain. Suppose the total benefit of a dam is
less than its total cost, so the project is inefficient, but a few farmers reap
large benefits from the dam, while the costs are spread over a million
taxpayers. The farmers have a strong incentive to spend time and money
convincing policymakers to build the dam. In contrast, if the tax is only $1 per
person, few taxpayers will make their preferences known to policymakers because
the marginal benefit (the $1 tax savings) is less than the marginal cost (the
opportunity cost of their time). If politicians listen to people who express
their preferences and contribute money to political campaigns, the inefficient
project may be approved. This is an example of a _special-interest_ group
(farmers) **manipulating the government at the expense of a larger group** (all
taxpayers). **In general, when a few people share the benefit from a project and a
large number of people share the cost, the government is more likely to approve
inefficient projects.**


## Chapter Summary

In this chapter, we’ve seen why the government provides public goods. The
free-rider problem means that we can’t rely on voluntary contributions to
support public goods and subsidies, so taxes are necessary to support public
programs. We’ve also examined different views on how governments actually make
decisions. Here are the main points of the chapter:

  1. When a good generates _external benefits_, collective decision making
     generates more efficient choices.
  2. A _public good_ is available for everyone to consume (nonrival in
     consumption), regardless of who pays and who doesn’t (nonexcludable).
  3. A system of voluntary contributions suffers from the _free-rider problem_:
     People do not have a financial incentive to support public goods.
  4. Education generates external benefits in the workplace and in elections and
     reduces crime.
  5. The _median-voter rule_ suggests that government choices will match the
     preferences of the median voter, defined as the voter whose preferences lie
     in the middle of voter preferences.

<br>

# Resources

Text Books

  - Microeconomics: _Principles, Applications, and Tools_ 10th ed (eText).
    * Authors: O'Sullivan/Sheffrin/Perez

