---
title: ECON 121 Chapter 11 Notes
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-04-23
summary: Market Entry and Monopolistic Competition
---


# Chapter 11: Market Entry and Monopolistic Competition

<a name="monopolistic-competition-term">**Monopolistic competition**</a>

  - A market served by many firms that sell slightly different products.

    * Each firm in the market produces a good that is slightly different from
      the goods of other firms, so each firm has a narrowly defined monopoly.

    * The products sold by different firms in the market are close substitutes
      for one another, so there is intense competition between firms for
      consumers. For example, your local grocery store may stock several brands
      of toothbrushes with different design features. If the price of one brand
      increases, some loyal customers will continue to buy the brand, but others
      will switch to different brands that are close substitutes.


## 11.1 The Effects of Market Entry

![Figure 11.1 Market Entry Decreases Price and Squeezes Profit](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-11/ch-11_figure-11.1.png)

> \(A) A monopolist maximizes profit at point a, where marginal revenue equals
marginal cost. The firm sells 300 toothbrushes at a price of $2.00 (point b) and
an average cost of $0.90 (point c). The profit of $330 is shown by the shaded
rectangle. (B) The entry of a second firm shifts the firm-specific demand curve
for the original firm to the left. The firm produces only 200 toothbrushes
(point d) at a lower price ($1.80, shown by point e) and a higher average cost
($1.00, shown by point f). The firm’s profit, shown by the shaded rectangle,
shrinks to $160.

The firm’s profit, shown by the shaded rectangle, is $330:

$$
\text{profit} = (\text{price - average cost}) \times quantity = (\$2.00 -
\$0.09) \times 300 = \$330
$$

### 11.1.1 Entry Squeezes Profits from Three Sides

In Panel B of Figure 11.1, the firm-specific demand curve for the original
monopolist shifts to the left, and profit decreases for three reasons:

  1. _The market price drops_. The marginal principle is satisfied at point d,
     so the original firm now produces 200 toothbrushes at a price of $1.80
     (point e). The competition between the two firms causes the price to drop,
     from $2.00 to $1.80.
  2. _The quantity produced by the first firm decreases_. The original firm
     produces only 200 toothbrushes, down from the 300 it produced as a
     monopolist.
  3. _The first firm’s average cost of production increases_. The decrease in
     the quantity produced causes the firm to move upward along its negatively
     sloped average-cost curve to a higher average cost per toothbrush, from
     $0.90 to $1.00 (point f).

The effects of entry are shown by comparing the profit rectangles in Panels A
and B of Figure 11.1. Entry shrinks the firm’s profit rectangle because it is
squeezed from three directions. The top of the rectangle drops because the price
decreases. The bottom of the rectangle rises because the average cost increases.
The right side of the rectangle moves to the left because the quantity
decreases. In this example, profit drops from $330 to $160:

$$
\text{profit} = (\text{price} - \text{average cost}) \times \text{quantity} =
(\$1.80 - 1.00) \times 200 = \$160
$$


## 11.2 Monopolistic Competition

We’ve seen that the entry of a firm in a profitable market decreases the price
and the profit per firm. Under a market structure called
[monopolistic competition](ch-11#monopolistic-competition-term), firms will continue to enter the market until economic profit is
zero. Here are the features of monopolistic competition:

  - _Many firms_. Because there are relatively small
    [economies of scale](ch-8#economies-of-scale-term), a small firm can produce its product
    at about the same average cost as a large firm.  For example, a small donut
    shop can produce donuts and coffee at about the same average cost as a large
    shop. Because even a small firm can cover its costs, the market can support
    many firms.

  - _A differentiated product_. Firms engage in
    [product differentiation](ch-11#product-differentiation-term), the process
    used by firms to distinguish their products from the products of competing
    firms. A firm can distinguish its products from the products of other firms
    by offering a different performance level or appearance. For example,
    automobiles differ in horsepower and fuel efficiency, and toothpastes differ
    in flavor and their ability to clean teeth. Some products are differentiated
    by the services that come with them. For example, some stores provide
    informative and helpful salespeople, whereas others require consumers to
    make decisions on their own.  Some pizza places offer home delivery, and
    some software producers offer free technical assistance. As we see later in
    the chapter, some products are differentiated by where they are sold.

  - _No artificial barriers to entry_. There are no patents or regulations that
    could prevent firms from entering the market.

These characteristics explain the logic behind the label “monopolistic
competition.” Product differentiation means each firm is the sole seller of a
narrowly defined good. For example, each firm in the toothbrush market has a
unique design for its toothbrushes, so each is a monopolist in the narrowly
defined market for that design. Because the products from different firms are
close substitutes, there is keen competition for consumers. When one toothbrush
maker increases its price, many of its consumers will switch to the similar
toothbrushes produced by other firms. In other words, the demand for the product
of a monopolistically competitive firm is very price elastic: An increase in
price decreases the quantity demanded by a relatively large amount because
consumers can easily switch to another firm selling a similar product.

<a name="product-differentiation-term">**Product differentiation**</a>

  - The process used by firms to distinguish their product of competing firms.

### 11.2.1 When Entry Stops: Long-Run Equilibrium

Because there are no barriers to entering the toothbrush market, firms will
continue to enter until each firm makes zero economic profit. Figure 11.2 shows
the long-run equilibrium from the perspective of the typical firm. Suppose a
total of six firms are in the toothbrush market. Given the firm-specific demand
curve in a market with six firms, the typical firm satisfies the marginal
principle at point a by selling 80 brushes per minute at a price of $1.40 (point
b) and an average cost of $1.40. Because the price equals the average cost, the
typical firm makes zero economic profit. Each firm’s revenue is high enough to
cover all its costs--including the opportunity cost of all its inputs--but not
enough to cause additional firms to enter the market. In other words, each firm
makes just enough money to stay in business.

![Figure 11.2 Long-Run Equilibrium with Monopolistic Compition](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-11/ch-11_figure-11.2.png)

> Under monopolistic competition, firms continue to enter the market until
economic profit is zero. Entry shifts the firm-specific demand curve to the
left. The typical firm maximizes profit at point a, where marginal revenue
equals marginal cost. At a quantity of 80 toothbrushes, price equals average
cost (shown by point b), so economic profit is zero.

### 11.2.2 Differentiation by Location

In some monopolistically competitive markets, differentiation is simply a matter
of location. Some examples are gas stations, music stores, bookstores, grocery
stores, movie theaters, and ice cream parlors. In each case, many firms sell the
same product at different locations. Your city probably has several bookstores,
each of which sells a particular book at about the same price. Everything else
being equal, you are likely to purchase books from the most convenient store,
but if a store across town offers lower prices, you might purchase your books
there instead. In other words, each store has a monopoly in its own
neighborhood, but competes with bookstores in the rest of the city.

![Figure 11.3 Long-Run Equilibrium with Spatial Competition](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-11/ch-11_figure-11.3.png)

> Bookstores and other retailers differentiate their products by selling them at
different locations. The typical bookstore chooses the quantity of books at
which its marginal revenue equals its marginal cost (point a). Economic profit
is zero because the price equals average cost (point b).


## 11.3 Trade-Offs with Entry and Monopolistic Competition


### 11.3.1 Average Cost and Variety

There are some trade-offs associated with monopolistic competition. Although the
average cost of production is higher than the minimum, there is also more
product-variety. In a market with many toothbrush firms, consumers can choose
from a wide variety of designs, so the higher average cost is at least partly
offset by greater product variety. Here are two other examples of the benefits
of product variety:

  - _Restaurant meals_. The typical large city has dozens of Italian
    restaurants, each of which has a different menu and prepares its food in
    different ways.  Consumers can pick from restaurants offering a wide variety
    of menus and preparation techniques. Although a city with a single Italian
    restaurant would have a lower average cost of preparing Italian meals,
    consumers would get less variety.

  - _Shoes and clothing_. Shoes are differentiated according to their style and
    performance. If we all wore the same type of shoes, the average cost of
    producing shoes would be lower, but consumers would be unable to match their
    shoe preferences with suitable shoes. Similarly, if we all wore uniforms,
    the average cost of clothing would be lower, but that would eliminate
    clothing choice.

What are the trade-offs when products are differentiated by location? When firms
sell the same product at different locations, the larger the number of firms,
the higher the average cost of production. But when firms are numerous,
consumers travel shorter distances to get the product. Therefore, higher
production costs are at least partly offset by lower travel costs. If a large
metropolitan area had only one bookstore, the average cost of books would be
lower, but consumers would spend more time traveling to get the books.

### 11.3.2 Monopolistic Competition versus Perfect Competition

Product differentiation is what makes monopolistic competition different from
perfect competition. Perfectly competitive firms produce homogeneous products,
while monopolistically competitive firms produce differentiated products.

Panel A of Figure 11.4 shows the equilibrium for a perfectly competitive firm.
Each price-taking firm has a horizontal demand curve. Point a shows the long-run
equilibrium because the typical firm (1) satisfies the marginal principle,
choosing the quantity where marginal revenue equals marginal cost, and (2) earns
zero

$$
\text{price} = \text{marginal cost} = \text{average cost}
$$

![Figure 11.4 Monopolistic Competition versus Perfect Competition](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-11/ch-11_figure-11.4.png)

> (A) In a perfectly competitive market, the firm-specific demand curve is
horizontal at the market price, and marginal revenue equals price. In
equilibrium, $\text{price} = \text{marginal cost} = \text{average cost}$. The
equilibrium occurs at the minimum of the average-cost curve. (B) In a
monopolistically competitive market, the firm-specific demand curve is
negatively sloped and marginal revenue is less than price. In equilibrium,
marginal revenue equals marginal cost (point b) and price equals average cost
(point c).

## 11.4 Advertising for Product Differentiation

By paying millions of dollars to run an advertisement featuring a celebrity, a
firm sends a signal to consumers that the advertised product is appealing and
likely to be popular. To illustrate this signaling effect, consider a firm that
develops a new energy bar and picks a celebrity to endorse it. The purpose of a
celebrity advertisement is to get people to try the product for the first time.
After that, a consumer will base any repeat purchases on the taste and
nutritional value of the energy bar. Suppose an advertisement with a cost of $10
million would cause 10 million consumers to try the energy bar. As shown in the
first row of Table 11.1, energy bar A is an appealing product, and half the
consumers who try it will become repeat consumers. If the firm makes a profit of
$4 on each repeat customer, the firm’s profit of $20 million exceeds the $10
million cost of the advertisement, so the firm will run the advertisement.

**Table 11.1** Advertising Profitability and Signaling

| Product      | Number of consumers who try the product | Number of repeat customers | Profit per repeat customer | Profit from repeat customers | Cost of advertisement |
|--------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------|-----------------------|
| Energy bar A | 10 million                              | 5 million                  | $4                         | $20 million                  | $10 million           |
| Energy bar B | 10 million                              | 1 million                  | 4                          | 4 million                    | 10 million            |

What about a product that is less appealing? The second row of Table 11.1 shows
the effects of an advertisement for energy bar B. Only 1 in 10 people who try
energy bar B will become a repeat customer, so the firm’s profit from an
advertisement is only $4 million. That is not enough to cover the $10 million
cost, so the firm won’t advertise the less-appealing product. Notice that
celebrity endorsements for the two products are equally effective in getting
people to try the products, but **what matters is repeat customers**. The
less-appealing product gets fewer repeat customers because it’s an inferior
product, and that’s why it’s not worthwhile to pay for an advertisement.

## Chapter Summary

This chapter is about market entry and monopolistic competition. In a
monopolistically competitive market, entry continues until each firm in the
market makes zero economic profit. Firms can differentiate their products by
design, level of service, location, or product image. Here are the main points
of the chapter:

  1. The entry of a firm into a market decreases the market price, decreases
     output per firm, and increases the average cost of production.
  2. In a
     [monopolistically competitive](ch-11#monopolistic-competition-term)
     market, firms compete for customers by producing
     [differentiated products](ch-11#product-differentiation-term).
  3. In the long-run equilibrium with monopolistic competition, marginal revenue
     equals marginal cost, price equals average cost, and economic profit is
     zero.
  4. Under monopolistic competition, the average cost of production is higher
     than the minimum, but there is also more product variety.
  5. A firm can use celebrity endorsements and other costly advertisements to
     signal its belief that a product will be appealing.

<br>

# References

Text Books

  - Microeconomics: _Principles, Applications, and Tools_ 10th ed (eText).
    * Authors: O'Sullivan/Sheffrin/Perez

