---
title: ECON 121 Chapter 2
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-02-14
---

# Chapter 2: The Key Principles of Economics

In this chapter, **five key principles** that provide a foundation for economic
analysis will be introduced.

**Principle**

  - A self evident truth that most people readily understand and accept.

## 2.1 The Principle of Opportunity Cost

> The Opportunity cost of something is what you sacrifice to get it.

Economics is all about making choices, and to make good choices we must compare
the benefit of something to its cost.

**Opportunity cost**

  - What you sacrifice to get something.

For every decision we do, the benefits of the decision should exceed the
opportunity cost of the trade-off.

> No matter what we do, there is always a trade-off.

## 2.2 The Marginal Principle

> Increase the level of an activity as long as its marginal benefit exceeds its
marginal cost. Choose the level at which the marginal benefit equals the
marginal cost.

Economists think in marginal terms, considering how a one-unit change in one
variable affects the value of another variable and people's decisions.

The marginal principle is based on a comparison of the marginal benefits and
marginal costs of a particular activity.

**Marginal benefit**

  - The additional benefit resulting from a small increase in some activity.

**Marginal cost**

  - The additional cost resulting from a small increase in some activity.

For example, if the marginal benefit is $80 of additional revenue and the
marginal cost is $30 of additional expense for workers and utilities, staying
open for the additional hour increases the bookstore's profit by $50.

> When we reach the level where the marginal benefit equals the marginal cost,
we cannot do any better, and the fine-tuning is done.

## 2.3 The Principle of Voluntary Exchange

The principle of voluntary exchange is based on the notion that people act in
their own self-interest. Self-interested people won't exchange one thing for
another unless the trade makes them better off.

> A voluntary exchange between two people makes both people better off.

The alternative to exchange is _self-sufficiency_: Each of us could produce
everything for himself or herself.

## 2.4 The Principle of Diminishing Returns

> Suppose output is produced with two or more inputs, and we increase one input
while holding the other input or inputs fixed. Beyond some point--called the point
of diminishing returns--output will increase at a decreasing rate.

For example, one of the inputs in the production of corn is nitrogen fertilizer.
Suppose a farmer has a fixed amount of land (an acre) and must decide how much
fertilizer to apply. The first 50-pound bag of fertilizer will increase the crop
yield by a relatively large amount, but the second bag is likely to increase the
yield by a smaller amount, and the third bag is likely to have an even smaller
effect. Because the farmer is changing just one of the inputs, the output will
increase, but at a decreasing rate. Eventually, additional fertilizer will
decrease output as the other nutrients in the soil are overwhelmed by the
fertilizer.

## 2.5 The Real-Nominal Principle

> What matters to people is the real value of money or income--its purchasing
power--not its face value.

One of the key ideas in economics is that people are interested not just in the
amount of money they have but also in how much their money will buy.

Economists use special terms to express the ideas behind the real-nominal
principle:

**Nominal value**

  - An amount of money simply its face value.
  - For example, the nominal wage paid by the bookstore is $10 per hour.

**Real value**

  - An amount of money measured in terms of the quantity of goods the money can
    buy.
  - For example, the real value of your bookstore wage would fall as the prices
    of movies and snacks increase, even though your nominal wage stayed the
    same.

## References

Text Books

  * Microeconomics: _Principles, Applications, and Tools_ 10th ed (eText).
    - Authors: O'Sullivan/Sheffrin/Perez
