---
title: ECON 121 Chapter 6 Notes
author: Mark Lucernas
date: 2020-03-14
---


# Chapter 6: Market Efficiency and Government Intervention

## 6.1 Consumer Surplus and Producer Surplus

**Efficiency**

  - A situation in which people do the best they can, given their limited
    resources.

A market equilibrium will generate the largest possible surplus when four
conditions are met:

  - _No external benefits_: The benefits of a product (a good or service) are
    confined to the person who pays for it.
  - _No external costs_: The cost of producing a product is confined to the
    person who sells it.
  - _Perfect information_: Buyers and sellers know enough about the product to
    make informed decisions about whether to buy or sell it.
  - _Perfect competition_: Each firm produces such a small quantity that the
    firm cannot affect the price.

> A situation is efficient if we are doing the best we can, given our limited
resources. In the case of a market, doing the best we can means getting the
largest possible surplus.

### 6.1.1 The Demand Curve and Consumer Surplus

**Willingness to pay**

  - The maximum amount a consumer is willing to a for a product.

**Consumer surplus**

  - The amount a consumer is willing to pay for a product minus the price the
    consumer actually pays.
    * For example, if you are willing to pay $21 for a book that you buy for
      $10, your consumer surplus is $11.

**Market consumer surplus**

  - The market consumer surplus equals the sum of the surpluses earned by all
    consumers in the market.

### 6.1.2 The Supply Curve and Producer Surplus

**Willingness to accept**

  - The minimum amount a producer is willing to accept as payment for a product;
    equal to the marginal cost of production.
    * For example, if your marginal cost of cutting a lawn is $4, you will be
      willing to accept any amount greater than or equal to $4.

**Producer surplus**

  - The price a producer receives for a product minus the marginal cost of
    production.

**Market producer surplus**

  - The market producer surplus equals the sum of the surpluses earned by all
    producers in the market.


## 6.2 Market Equilibrium and Efficiency

**Total surplus**

  - The sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus

### 6.2.1 Total Surplus Is Lower with a Price below the Equilibrium Price

**Price ceiling**

  - A maximum price set by the government.

### 6.2.2 Total Surplus Is Lower with a Price above the Equilibrium Price

**Price floor**

  - A minimum price set by the government.

What's the difference between the two pricing policies?

  - Under a maximum price, the consumers gain at the expense of the producers,
    whereas under the minimum price, producers gain at the expense of consumers.

### 6.2.3 Efficiency and the Invisible Hand

The market equilibrium maximizes the total surplus of the market because it
guarantees that all mutually beneficial transactions will happen.

The typical market has thousands of buyers and thousands of sellers, each acting
in his or her own self-interest. The market reaches the quantity that maximizes
the total surplus of the market and is therefore efficient. Instead of using a
bureaucrat to coordinate the actions of everyone in the market, we can rely on
the actions of individual consumers and individual producers, each guided only
by self-interest. This is Adam Smith's **invisible hand** in action.

### 6.2.4 Government Intervention in Efficient Markets

For a market that meets the four efficiency conditions, the market equilibrium
generates the largest possible total surplus, so government intervention can
only decrease the surplus and cause inefficiency. A government motivated
exclusively by efficiency would not intervene in such a market, but instead
would permit the invisible hand to guide consumers and producers to the market
equilibrium.

So why would a government intervene in an efficient market? Sometimes the
government's objective is not to promote efficiency--to maximize the size of the
pie--but instead to slice the pie in favor of one group or another. For example,
a government that restricts shoe imports prevents some domestic workers from
losing their shoemaking jobs

What is the role of economic analysis in exploring government intervention in
efficient markets? We focus our attention on the inefficiencies of government
intervention, looking at how much the pie shrinks.


## 6.3 Controlling Prices--Maximum and Minimum Prices

> Price controls reduce the total surplus of a market because they prevent
mutually beneficial transactions.

### 6.3.1 Setting Maximum Prices

When the government sets a maximum price that is less than the equilibrium
price, the result is permanent excess demand for the product. The maximum price
encourages firms to supply _less_ and encourages consumers to buy _more_.

### 6.3.2 Rent Control

**Deadweight loss**

  - The decrease in the total surplus of the market that results from a policy
    such as rent control.

![Figure 6.5](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-6/ch-6_Figure_6.5.png)

In Figure 6.5, the deadweight loss is shown by the yellow triangle _abc_, the
decrease in the total surplus of the market. This is a deadweight loss in the
sense that it is not offset by a gain to anyone else. The consumers and
producers who are excluded from the market by rent control lose the surpluses
they could have received in the market. The loss of consumer surplus is shown by
triangle _cad_, and the loss of producer surplus is shown by triangle _dab_.
Adding these together, we get the deadweight loss shown by triangle _abc_.

Three more subtle effects associated with rent control add to its inefficiency:

  - _Search costs_. At the artificially low maximum price, the number of people
    seeking apartments exceeds the number of apartments available. Consumers
    will spend more time searching for apartments, so an additional cost of rent
    control is the opportunity cost of the extra time spent searching for
    apartments.

  - _Cheating_. Because rent control outlaws mutually beneficial transactions,
    many people violate the spirit and the letter of the law by cheating. In
    some rent-control cities, consumers pay extra money to property owners to
    outbid other consumers. These extra payments are often disguised as
    “nonrefundable security deposits” or as “key money”thousands of dollars to
    get the keys to an apartment.

  - _Decrease in quality of housing_. Given the lower payoff from providing
    apartments for rent, property owners will have less incentive to spend money
    on repair and maintenance, so the quality of apartments will decrease. In
    other words, lower rent is offset in part by lower housing quality.

Is rent control good for the poor? Rent control specifies a maximum rent for an
apartment, regardless of who lives there. Rent-controlled apartments are
occupied by the rich and the poor, so many wealthy people benefit from rent
control. In other words, rent control is ineffective in helping the poor.

### 6.3.3 Setting Minimum Prices

When the government sets a minimum price that exceeds the equilibrium price, the
result is permanent excess supply. The increase in price encourages producers to
produce _more_ and encourages consumers to buy _less_.

## 6.4 Controlling Quantities--Licensing and Import Restrictions

> Quantity controls (such as licensing and import restrictions) decrease
consumer surplus and the total surplus of the market.

What happens when the government controls the quantity of a particular product
instead of its price? We consider two policies that control quantities. In the
domestic economy, many state and local governments limit the number of firms in
particular markets by limiting the number of business licenses to operate in
those markets. Many national governments restrict imports, using import bans or
quotas on the quantity of a product--for example, shoes or cheese--that can be
imported.

### 6.4.1 Taxi Medallions

![Figure 6.6](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-6/ch-6_Figure_6.6.png)

### 6.4.2 Licensing and Market Efficiency

As shown by the points between points _c_ and _a_ on the demand curve, many
consumers are willing to pay between $3.00 and $3.60 per mile for taxi service.
Although there are plenty of drivers who would be willing to provide taxi
service at these prices, they can't do so without a medallion. Because the
medallion policy prevents these riders and drivers from executing mutually
beneficial transactions, the policy causes inefficiency.

In general, a policy that limits entry into a market increases price, decreases
quantity, and causes inefficiency in the market.

### 6.4.3 Winners and Losers from Licensing

Who benefits and who loses from licensing programs such as a taxi medallion
policy? The losers are consumers, who pay more for taxi rides. The winners are
the people who receive a free medallion and the right to charge an artificially
high price for taxi service.

### 6.4.4 Import Restriction

Another way to control quantity is to limit the imports of a particular good.
Like a licensing policy, an import restriction increases the market price and
decreases the total surplus of the market.

![Figure 6.7](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-6/ch-6_Figure_6.7.png)

The import ban would ultimately decrease the total surplus in the sugar market.

Import restrictions are often defended on the grounds that they increase
employment in the "protected" industries, such as apparel and steel. But the
protection of these jobs increases consumer prices, so there is a trade-off:
more jobs in the protected industry, but higher prices for consumers.

## 6.5 Who Really Pays Taxes?

First, who really bears the burden of a tax? As we’ll see, it is not necessarily
the person who actually pays the tax to the government. Second, is the total
burden of a tax equal to the revenue collected by the government? As we’ll see,
a tax changes people's behavior, so the total burden actually exceeds the
revenue collected.

> A tax on a good may be shifted forward onto consumers and backward onto input
suppliers.


### 6.5.1 Tax Shifting: Forward and Backward

Suppose that your city imposes a tax of $100 per apartment and collects the tax
from housing firms--the firms that own apartment buildings and rent out the
apartments. You may think the burden of the tax falls exclusively on the housing
firm because that's who mails the check to the government. But some simple
supply and demand analysis will show why this is incorrect. The housing firm
will charge more for apartments and pay less for its inputs, such as labor and
land, so the tax will actually be paid by consumers and input suppliers.

![Figure 6.8](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-6/ch-6_Figure_6.8.png)

The apartment tax also affects the people who supply inputs such as land and
labor to the housing industry. The tax decreases the output of the industry, so
the industry needs smaller quantities of the inputs used to produce apartments.
The resulting excess supply of inputs like labor and land will decrease land and
labor prices, decreasing the cost of producing apartments. As a result, part of
the $100 tax gets shifted backward onto input suppliers. Although housing firms
pay the apartment tax in a legal sense, they get some of the money to pay the
tax by paying less to workers and landowners.

### 6.5.2 Tax Shifting and the Price Elasticity of Demand

The amount of the tax shifted forward to consumers depends on the price
elasticity of demand for the taxed good. If the demand for a taxed good is
inelastic--meaning that consumers are not very responsive to price changes--we
need a large price hike to eliminate the excess demand caused by the tax.
Therefore, consumers will be hit by a large increase in price, and so they will
pay the bulk of the tax.

![Figure 6.9](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-6/ch-6_Figure_6.9.png)

### 6.5.3 Cigarette Taxes and Tobacco Land

In 1994, President Bill Clinton proposed an immediate $0.75 per pack increase in
the cigarette tax. The tax had two purposes: to generate revenue for Clinton's
health-care reform plan and to decrease medical costs by discouraging smoking.
Based on our discussion of the market effects of a tax, we would predict that
the tax would be shared by consumers, who would pay higher prices, and the
owners of land where tobacco is grown. It appears tobacco farmers and landowners
understand the economics of cigarette taxes. Led by a group of representatives
and senators from tobacco-growing areas in North Carolina, Kentucky, and
Virginia, Congress scaled back Clinton's proposed tax hike from $0.75 to $0.05.
Although the government would have collected the tax from cigarette
manufacturers, savvy tobacco farmers realized the tax would decrease the price
of their tobacco-growing land.

### 6.5.4 The Luxury Boat Tax and Boat Workers

A lesson on backward shifting occurred when Congress passed a steep luxury tax
on boats and other luxury goods in 1990.  Under the new tax, a person buying a
$300,000 boat paid an additional $20,000 in taxes. The burden of the tax was
actually shared by consumers and input suppliers, including people who worked in
boat factories and boatyards. The tax increased the price of boats, and
consumers bought fewer boats. The boat industry produced fewer boats, and the
resulting decrease in the demand for boat workers led to layoffs and lower wages
for those who managed to keep their jobs.  Although the idea behind the luxury
tax was to “soak the rich,” the tax actually harmed low-income workers in the
boat industry. The tax was repealed a few years later.

### 6.5.5 Tax Burden and Deadweight Loss

We've seen that people respond to a tax by changing their behavior. As a result,
the total burden of a tax will exceed the total amount of money the government
actually collects from the tax.

> Because a tax causes people to change their behavior, the total burden of the
tax exceeds the revenue generated by the tax.

![Figure 6.10](file:../../../../files/spring-2020/ECON-121/ch-6/ch-6_Figure_6.10.png)

In Figure 6.10 the fish tax increases the equilibrium price of fish from $2 to
$3. Why does the price increase by an amount equal to the tax? The supply curve
is horizontal because input prices are fixed, regardless of how much output is
produced. There is no opportunity to shift the tax backward onto input
suppliers, so consumers bear the full cost of the tax.

<br>

# References

Text Books

  - Microeconomics: _Principles, Applications, and Tools_ 10th ed (eText).
    * Authors: O'Sullivan/Sheffrin/Perez

